308 7 • Work, Energy, and Energy Resources
7.9 World Energy Use
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the distinction between renewable and nonrenewable energy sources.
• Explain why the inevitable conversion of energy to less useful forms makes it necessary to conserve
energy resources.
Energy is an important ingredient in all phases of society. We live in a very interdependent world, and access to
adequate and reliable energy resources is crucial for economic growth and for maintaining the quality of our lives.
But current levels of energy consumption and production are not sustainable. Depending on the data source,
estimates indicate that about 31–35% of the world’s energy comes from oil, and much of that goes to transportation
uses. This is a reduction by a few percentage points from ten years ago. Oil prices are dependent as much upon new
(or foreseen) discoveries as they are upon political events and situations around the world. The U.S., with 4.25% of
the world’s population, consumes 21% of the world’s oil production per year.
Renewable and Nonrenewable Energy Sources
The principal energy resources used in the world are shown in Figure 7.26. The fuel mix has changed over the years
but now is dominated by oil, although natural gas and solar contributions are increasing. Renewable forms of
energy are those sources that cannot be used up, such as water, wind, solar, and biomass. About 85% of our energy
comes from nonrenewable fossil fuels—oil, natural gas, coal. The likelihood of a link between global warming and
fossil fuel use, with its production of carbon dioxide through combustion, has made, in the eyes of many scientists, a
shift to non-fossil fuels of utmost importance—but it will not be easy.
FIGURE 7.26 World energy consumption by source, in billions of kilowatt-hours: 2006. (credit: KVDP)
The World’s Growing Energy Needs
World energy consumption continues to rise, especially in the developing countries. (See Figure 7.27.) Global
demand for energy has tripled in the past 50 years and might triple again in the next 30 years. While much of this
growth will come from the rapidly booming economies of China and India, many of the developed countries,
especially those in Europe, are hoping to meet their energy needs by expanding the use of renewable sources.
Although presently only a small percentage, renewable energy is growing very fast, especially wind energy. For
example, Germany plans to meet 65% of its power and 30% of its overall energy needs with renewable resources by
the year 2030. (See Figure 7.28.) Energy is a key constraint in the rapid economic growth of China and India. In
2003, China surpassed Japan as the world’s second largest consumer of oil. However, over 1/3 of this is imported.
Unlike most Western countries, coal dominates the commercial energy resources of China, accounting for 2/3 of its
energy consumption. In 2009 China surpassed the United States as the largest generator of . In India, the main
energy resources are biomass (wood and dung) and coal. Half of India’s oil is imported. About 70% of India’s
electricity is generated by highly polluting coal. Yet there are sizeable strides being made in renewable energy. India
has a rapidly growing wind energy base, and it has the largest solar cooking program in the world. China has
Access for free at openstax.org

7.9 • World Energy Use 309
invested substantially in building solar collection farms as well as hydroelectric plants.
FIGURE 7.27 Past and projected world energy use (source: Based on data from U.S. Energy Information Administration, 2021)
FIGURE 7.28 Solar cell arrays at a power plant in California (credit: Bureau of Land Management, Flickr)
Table 7.6 displays the 2020 commercial energy mix by country for some of the prime energy users in the world.
While non-renewable sources dominate, some countries get a sizeable percentage of their electricity from
renewable resources. For example, about two-thirds of New Zealand’s electricity demand is met by hydroelectric.
Only 10% of the U.S. electricity is generated by renewable resources, primarily hydroelectric. It is difficult to
determine total sources and consumers of energy in many countries, and estimates vary somewhat by data source
and type of measurement.
|          | Consumption, in EJ  | Natural  |                |        | Other  |
| -------- | ------------------- | -------- | -------------- | ------ | ------ |
| Country  |                     | Oil      | Coal  Nuclear  | Hydro  |        |
(1018 J)
Gas  Renewables
| Australia  | 5.6    | 1.8  1.5    | 1.7  0     | 0.1  0.5   |     |
| ---------- | ------ | ----------- | ---------- | ---------- | --- |
| Brazil     | 12     | 4.6  1.2    | 0.6  0.1   | 3.5  2     |     |
| China      | 145.5  | 28.5  11.9  | 82.3  3.3  | 11.7  7.8  |     |
| Egypt      | 3.7    | 1.3  2.1    | 0.0%  0    | 0.1  0.1   |     |
| Germany    | 12.1   | 4.2  3.1    | 1.9  0.6   | 0.2  2.2   |     |
| India      | 31.99  | 9  2.2      | 17.5  0.4  | 1.5  1.4   |     |
| Indonesia  | 8.1    | 2.8  1.5    | 3.3  0     | 0.2  0.4   |     |
| Japan      | 17     | 6.5  3.8    | 4.6  0.4   | 0.7  1.1   |     |
TABLE 7.6 Energy Consumption—Selected Countries (2020)

310 7 • Work, Energy, and Energy Resources
|          | Consumption, in EJ  |      | Natural        |        | Other       |
| -------- | ------------------- | ---- | -------------- | ------ | ----------- |
| Country  |                     | Oil  | Coal  Nuclear  | Hydro  |             |
|          | (1018 J)            |      | Gas            |        | Renewables  |
United
|     | 6.9  | 2.4  | 2.6  0.2  0.5  | 0.1  | 1.2  |
| --- | ---- | ---- | -------------- | ---- | ---- |
Kingdom
| Russia  | 28.3   | 6.4    | 14.8  3.2  1.9    | 1.9   | 0.5   |
| ------- | ------ | ------ | ----------------- | ----- | ----- |
| U.S.    | 87.8   | 32.5   | 30  9.2  7.4      | 2.6   | 6.2   |
| World   | 557.1  | 174.2  | 137.6  151.4  24  | 38.2  | 31.7  |
TABLE 7.6 Energy Consumption—Selected Countries (2020)
Energy and Economic Well-being
Economic well-being is dependent upon energy use, and in most countries higher standards of living, as measured
by GDP (gross domestic product) per capita, are matched by higher levels of energy consumption per capita. This is
borne out in Figure 7.29. Increased efficiency of energy use will change this dependency. A global problem is
balancing energy resource development against the harmful effects upon the environment in its extraction and use.
New and diversified energy sources do, however, greatly increase economic opportunity and stability. First, the
extensive employment opportunities in renewable energy make it one of the most sustainable and secure fields to
enter. Second, renewable energy provides countries and localities with increased levels of resiliency in the face of
natural disasters, conflict, or other disruptions. The 21st century has already seen major economic impacts from
energy disruptions: Hurricane Katrina, Superstorm Sandy, various wildfires, Hurricane Maria, and the 2021 Texas
Winter Storm demonstrate the vulnerability of United States power systems. Diversifying energy sources through
renewables and other fossil-fuel alternatives brings power grids and transportation systems back online much more
quickly, saving lives and enabling a more swift return to economic operations. And as critical emerging information
infrastructure, such as data centers, requires more of the world's energy, supplying those growing systems during
normal operations and crises will be increasingly important.
FIGURE 7.29 Power consumption per capita versus GDP per capita for various countries. Note the increase in energy usage with increasing
GDP. (2007, credit: Frank van Mierlo, Wikimedia Commons)
Access for free at openstax.org

7.9 • World Energy Use 311
Conserving Energy
As we finish this chapter on energy and work, it is relevant to draw some distinctions between two sometimes
misunderstood terms in the area of energy use. As has been mentioned elsewhere, the “law of the conservation of
energy” is a very useful principle in analyzing physical processes. It is a statement that cannot be proven from basic
principles, but is a very good bookkeeping device, and no exceptions have ever been found. It states that the total
amount of energy in an isolated system will always remain constant. Related to this principle, but remarkably
different from it, is the important philosophy of energy conservation. This concept has to do with seeking to
decrease the amount of energy used by an individual or group through (1) reduced activities (e.g., turning down
thermostats, driving fewer kilometers) and/or (2) increasing conversion efficiencies in the performance of a
particular task—such as developing and using more efficient room heaters, cars that have greater miles-per-gallon
ratings, energy-efficient compact fluorescent lights, etc.
Since energy in an isolated system is not destroyed or created or generated, one might wonder why we need to be
concerned about our energy resources, since energy is a conserved quantity. The problem is that the final result of
most energy transformations is waste heat transfer to the environment and conversion to energy forms no longer
useful for doing work. To state it in another way, the potential for energy to produce useful work has been
“degraded” in the energy transformation. (This will be discussed in more detail in Thermodynamics.)

312     7 • Glossary
Glossary
basal metabolic rate  the total energy conversion rate  mechanical energy  the sum of kinetic energy and
| of a person at rest  |     |     | potential energy  |     |
| -------------------- | --- | --- | ----------------- | --- |
chemical energy  the energy in a substance stored in  metabolic rate  the rate at which the body uses food
the bonds between atoms and molecules that can  energy to sustain life and to do different activities
be released in a chemical reaction  net work  work done by the net force, or vector sum of
conservation of mechanical energy  the rule that the  all the forces, acting on an object
sum of the kinetic energies and potential energies  nonconservative force  a force whose work depends
remains constant if only conservative forces act on  on the path followed between the given initial and
| and within a system  |     |     | final configurations  |     |
| -------------------- | --- | --- | --------------------- | --- |
conservative force  a force that does the same work  nuclear energy  energy released by changes within
for any given initial and final configuration,  atomic nuclei, such as the fusion of two light nuclei
regardless of the path followed  or the fission of a heavy nucleus
efficiency  a measure of the effectiveness of the input  potential energy  energy due to position, shape, or
| of energy to do work; useful energy or work divided  |     |     | configuration  |     |
| ---------------------------------------------------- | --- | --- | -------------- | --- |
by the total input of energy  potential energy of a spring  the stored energy of a
electrical energy  the energy carried by a flow of  spring as a function of its displacement; when
| charge  |     |     | Hooke’s law applies, it is given by the expression  |     |
| ------- | --- | --- | --------------------------------------------------- | --- |
energy the ability to do work   where   is the distance the spring is
| fossil fuels  oil, natural gas, and coal  |     |     |                                             |     |
| ----------------------------------------- | --- | --- | ------------------------------------------- | --- |
|                                           |     |     | compressed or extended and   is the spring  |     |
friction  the force between surfaces that opposes one
constant
sliding on the other; friction changes mechanical  power  the rate at which work is done
energy into thermal energy
radiant energy  the energy carried by electromagnetic
| gravitational potential energy |     |  the energy an object  | waves  |     |
| ------------------------------ | --- | ---------------------- | ------ | --- |
has due to its position in a gravitational field
renewable forms of energy  those sources that
horsepower  an older non-SI unit of power, with  cannot be used up, such as water, wind, solar, and
biomass
joule  SI unit of work and energy, equal to one  thermal energy  the energy within an object due to
newton-meter
the random motion of its atoms and molecules that
kilowatt-hour    unit used primarily for  accounts for the object's temperature
electrical energy provided by electric utility
useful work  work done on an external system
| companies      |                                         |     | watt  (W) SI unit of power, with  |     |
| -------------- | --------------------------------------- | --- | --------------------------------- | --- |
| kinetic energy |  the energy an object has by reason of  |     |                                   |     |
work  the transfer of energy by a force that causes an
its motion, equal to   for the translational (i.e.,  object to be displaced; the product of the
non-rotational) motion of an object of mass  component of the force in the direction of the
| moving at speed               |     |                        | displacement and the magnitude of the  |     |
| ----------------------------- | --- | ---------------------- | -------------------------------------- | --- |
| law of conservation of energy |     |  the general law that  | displacement                           |     |
total energy is constant in any process; energy may  work-energy theorem  the result, based on Newton’s
change in form or be transferred from one system to  laws, that the net work done on an object is equal to
another, but the total remains the same  its change in kinetic energy
Section Summary
| 7.1 Work: The Scientific Definition  |     |     | where  | .   |
| ------------------------------------ | --- | --- | ------ | --- |
•  The work done by a force is zero if the
•  Work is the transfer of energy by a force acting on
displacement is either zero or perpendicular to
an object as it is displaced.
the force.
| •  The work  |  that a force  |  does on an object is  |     |     |
| ------------ | -------------- | ---------------------- | --- | --- |
•  The work done is positive if the force and
| the product of the magnitude  |     |  of the force,  |     |     |
| ----------------------------- | --- | --------------- | --- | --- |
displacement have the same direction, and
| times the magnitude  |     |  of the displacement,  |     |     |
| -------------------- | --- | ---------------------- | --- | --- |
negative if they have opposite direction.
| times the cosine of the angle  |     |  between them. In  |     |     |
| ------------------------------ | --- | ------------------ | --- | --- |
symbols,
•  The SI unit for work and energy is the joule (J),
Access for free at openstax.org

7 • Section Summary 313
7.2 Kinetic Energy and the Work-Energy 7.5 Nonconservative Forces
Theorem
• A nonconservative force is one for which work
• The net work is the work done by the net depends on the path.
force acting on an object. • Friction is an example of a nonconservative force
• Work done on an object transfers energy to the that changes mechanical energy into thermal
object. energy.
• The translational kinetic energy of an object of • Work done by a nonconservative force
mass moving at speed is . changes the mechanical energy of a system. In
equation form, or,
• The work-energy theorem states that the net
equivalently, .
work on a system changes its kinetic
• When both conservative and nonconservative
energy, .
forces act, energy conservation can be applied
7.3 Gravitational Potential Energy and used to calculate motion in terms of the
known potential energies of the conservative
• Work done against gravity in lifting an object
forces and the work done by nonconservative
becomes potential energy of the object-Earth
forces, instead of finding the net work from the
system.
net force, or having to directly apply Newton’s
• The change in gravitational potential energy,
laws.
, is , with being the
increase in height and the acceleration due to 7.6 Conservation of Energy
gravity.
• The law of conservation of energy states that the
• The gravitational potential energy of an object
total energy is constant in any process. Energy
near Earth’s surface is due to its position in the
may change in form or be transferred from one
mass-Earth system. Only differences in
system to another, but the total remains the
gravitational potential energy, , have
same.
physical significance.
• When all forms of energy are considered,
• As an object descends without friction, its
conservation of energy is written in equation
gravitational potential energy changes into
form as
kinetic energy corresponding to increasing
,
speed, so that .
where is all other forms of energy besides
7.4 Conservative Forces and Potential mechanical energy.
• Commonly encountered forms of energy include
Energy
electric energy, chemical energy, radiant energy,
• A conservative force is one for which work nuclear energy, and thermal energy.
depends only on the starting and ending points of • Energy is often utilized to do work, but it is not
a motion, not on the path taken. possible to convert all the energy of a system to
• We can define potential energy for any work.
conservative force, just as we defined for • The efficiency of a machine or human is
the gravitational force. defined to be , where is useful
• The potential energy of a spring is ,
work output and is the energy consumed.
where is the spring’s force constant and is
the displacement from its undeformed position. 7.7 Power
• Mechanical energy is defined to be for
• Power is the rate at which work is done, or in
a conservative force.
equation form, for the average power for work
• When only conservative forces act on and within
done over a time , .
a system, the total mechanical energy is
• The SI unit for power is the watt (W), where
constant. In equation form,
.
• The power of many devices such as electric
motors is also often expressed in horsepower
(hp), where .
where i and f denote initial and final values. This is
known as the conservation of mechanical energy.

314 7 • Conceptual Questions
7.8 Work, Energy, and Power in Humans 7.9 World Energy Use
• The human body converts energy stored in food • The relative use of different fuels to provide
into work, thermal energy, and/or chemical energy has changed over the years, but fuel use
energy that is stored in fatty tissue. is currently dominated by oil, although natural
• The rate at which the body uses food energy to gas and solar contributions are increasing.
sustain life and to do different activities is called • Although non-renewable sources dominate,
the metabolic rate, and the corresponding rate some countries meet a sizeable percentage of
when at rest is called the basal metabolic rate their electricity needs from renewable resources.
(BMR) • The United States obtains only about 10% of its
• The energy included in the basal metabolic rate energy from renewable sources, mostly
is divided among various systems in the body, hydroelectric power.
with the largest fraction going to the liver and • Economic well-being is dependent upon energy
spleen, and the brain coming next. use, and in most countries higher standards of
• About 75% of food calories are used to sustain living, as measured by GDP (Gross Domestic
basic body functions included in the basal Product) per capita, are matched by higher levels
metabolic rate. of energy consumption per capita.
• The energy consumption of people during various • Even though, in accordance with the law of
activities can be determined by measuring their conservation of energy, energy can never be
oxygen use, because the digestive process is created or destroyed, energy that can be used to
basically one of oxidizing food. do work is always partly converted to less useful
forms, such as waste heat to the environment, in
all of our uses of energy for practical purposes.
Conceptual Questions
7.1 Work: The Scientific Definition
1 . Give an example of something we think of as
work in everyday circumstances that is not work
in the scientific sense. Is energy transferred or
changed in form in your example? If so, explain
how this is accomplished without doing work.
2 . Give an example of a situation in which there is a
force and a displacement, but the force does no
work. Explain why it does no work.
FIGURE 7.30
3 . Describe a situation in which a force is exerted
5 . Work done on a system puts energy into it. Work
for a long time but does no work. Explain.
done by a system removes energy from it. Give
7.2 Kinetic Energy and the Work-Energy
an example for each statement.
Theorem
6 . When solving for speed in Example 7.4, we kept
4 . The person in Figure 7.30 does work on the lawn only the positive root. Why?
mower. Under what conditions would the mower
7.3 Gravitational Potential Energy
gain energy? Under what conditions would it lose
energy? 7 . In Example 7.7, we calculated the final speed of
a roller coaster that descended 20 m in height
and had an initial speed of 5 m/s downhill.
Suppose the roller coaster had had an initial
speed at the bottom of the hill of 5 m/s uphill
instead, and it coasted 20 m uphill, stopped, and
then rolled back down to a final point at the
same elevation as it started. We would find in
that case that its final speed is the same as its
initial speed. Explain in terms of conservation of
Access for free at openstax.org

7 • Conceptual Questions 315
energy. 15 . Do devices with efficiencies of less than one
violate the law of conservation of energy?
8 . Does the work you do on a book when you lift it
Explain.
onto a shelf depend on the path taken? On the
time taken? On the height of the shelf? On the 16 . List four different forms or types of energy. Give
mass of the book? one example of a conversion from each of these
forms to another form.
7.4 Conservative Forces and Potential
Energy 17 . List the energy conversions that occur when
riding a bicycle.
9 . What is a conservative force?
7.7 Power
10 . The force exerted by a diving board is
conservative, provided the internal friction is 18 . Most electrical appliances are rated in watts.
negligible. Assuming friction is negligible, Does this rating depend on how long the
describe changes in the potential energy of a appliance is on? (When off, it is a zero-watt
diving board as a swimmer dives from it, starting device.) Explain in terms of the definition of
just before the swimmer steps on the board until power.
just after his feet leave it.
19 . Explain, in terms of the definition of power, why
11 . Define mechanical energy. What is the energy consumption is sometimes listed in
relationship of mechanical energy to kilowatt-hours rather than joules. What is the
nonconservative forces? What happens to relationship between these two energy units?
mechanical energy if only conservative forces
20 . A spark of static electricity, such as that you
act?
might receive from a doorknob on a cold dry day,
12 . What is the relationship of potential energy to may carry a few hundred watts of power. Explain
conservative force? why you are not injured by such a spark.
7.6 Conservation of Energy 7.8 Work, Energy, and Power in Humans
13 . Consider the following scenario. A car for which 21 . Explain why it is easier to climb a mountain on a
friction is not negligible accelerates from rest down zigzag path rather than one straight up the side.
a hill, running out of gasoline after a short distance. Is your increase in gravitational potential energy
The driver lets the car coast farther down the hill, the same in both cases? Is your energy
then up and over a small crest. He then coasts down consumption the same in both?
that hill into a gas station, where he brakes to a stop
22 . Do you do work on the outside world when you
and fills the tank with gasoline. Identify the forms of
rub your hands together to warm them? What is
energy the car has, and how they are changed and
the efficiency of this activity?
transferred in this series of events. (See Figure
7.31.) 23 . Shivering is an involuntary response to lowered
body temperature. What is the efficiency of the
body when shivering, and is this a desirable
value?
24 . Discuss the relative impact of dieting and
exercise, noting that most athletic activities
consume food energy at a rate of 400 to 500 W,
while a single cup of yogurt can contain 1360 kJ
FIGURE 7.31 A car experiencing non-negligible friction coasts (325 kcal).
down a hill, over a small crest, then downhill again, and comes
to a stop at a gas station. 7.9 World Energy Use
14 . Describe the energy transfers and 25 . What is the difference between energy
transformations for a javelin, starting from the conservation and the law of conservation of
point at which an athlete picks up the javelin and energy? Give some examples of each.
ending when the javelin is stuck into the ground
26 . If the efficiency of a coal-fired electrical
after being thrown.
generating plant is 35%, then what do we mean

316 7 • Problems & Exercises
when we say that energy is a conserved quantity?
Problems & Exercises
7.1 Work: The Scientific Definition
1 . How much work does a supermarket checkout
attendant do on a can of soup he pushes 0.600
m horizontally with a force of 5.00 N? Express
your answer in joules and kilocalories.
2 . A 75.0-kg person climbs stairs, gaining 2.50
meters in height. Find the work done to
accomplish this task. (Neglect friction in your
calculations.)
FIGURE 7.33 The boy does work on the system of the
3 . (a) Calculate the work done on a 1500-kg wagon and the child when he pulls them as shown.
elevator car by its cable to lift it 40.0 m at
7 . A shopper pushes a grocery cart 20.0 m at
constant speed, assuming friction averages 100
constant speed on level ground, against a 35.0 N
N. (b) What is the work done on the elevator car
frictional force. He pushes in a direction
by the gravitational force in this process? (c)
below the horizontal. (a) What is the work done
What is the total work done on the elevator car?
on the cart by friction? (b) What is the work done
4 . Suppose a car travels 108 km at a speed of 30.0 on the cart by the gravitational force? (c) What is
m/s, and uses 2.0 gal of gasoline. Only 30% of the work done on the cart by the shopper? (d)
the gasoline goes into useful work by the force Find the force the shopper exerts, using energy
that keeps the car moving at constant speed considerations. (e) What is the total work done
despite friction. (See Table 7.1 for the energy on the cart?
content of gasoline.) (a) What is the magnitude
8 . Suppose the ski patrol lowers a rescue sled and
of the force exerted to keep the car moving at
victim, having a total mass of 90.0 kg, down a
constant speed? (b) If the required force is
slope at constant speed, as shown in
directly proportional to speed, how many gallons
Figure 7.34. The coefficient of friction between
will be used to drive 108 km at a speed of 28.0
the sled and the snow is 0.100. (a) How much
m/s?
work is done by friction as the sled moves 30.0
5 . Calculate the work done by an 85.0-kg man who m along the hill? (b) How much work is done by
pushes a crate 4.00 m up along a ramp that the rope on the sled in this distance? (c) What is
makes an angle of with the horizontal. (See the work done by the gravitational force on the
Figure 7.32.) He exerts a force of 500 N on the sled? (d) What is the total work done?
crate parallel to the ramp and moves at a
constant speed. Be certain to include the work
he does on the crate and on his body to get up
the ramp.
FIGURE 7.32 A man pushes a crate up a ramp.
6 . How much work is done by the boy pulling his
sister 30.0 m in a wagon as shown in Figure
7.33? Assume no friction acts on the wagon. FIGURE 7.34 A rescue sled and victim are lowered down a
steep slope.
Access for free at openstax.org

7 • Problems & Exercises 317
7.2 Kinetic Energy and the Work-Energy 7.3 Gravitational Potential Energy
Theorem
16 . A hydroelectric power facility (see Figure 7.35)
9 . Compare the kinetic energy of a 20,000-kg truck converts the gravitational potential energy of
moving at 110 km/h with that of an 80.0-kg water behind a dam to electric energy. (a) What
astronaut in orbit moving at 27,500 km/h. is the gravitational potential energy relative to
the generators of a lake of volume
10 . (a) How fast must a 3000-kg elephant move to
( , given that the lake
have the same kinetic energy as a 65.0-kg
has an average height of 40.0 m above the
sprinter running at 10.0 m/s? (b) Discuss how
generators? (b) Compare this with the energy
the larger energies needed for the movement of
stored in a 9-megaton fusion bomb.
larger animals would relate to metabolic rates.
11 . Confirm the value given for the kinetic energy of
an aircraft carrier in Table 7.1. You will need to
look up the definition of a nautical mile (1 knot =
1 nautical mile/h).
12 . (a) Calculate the force needed to bring a 950-kg
car to rest from a speed of 90.0 km/h in a
distance of 120 m (a fairly typical distance for a
non-panic stop). (b) Suppose instead the car hits
a concrete abutment at full speed and is brought
to a stop in 2.00 m. Calculate the force exerted
on the car and compare it with the force found in FIGURE 7.35 Hydroelectric facility (credit: Denis Belevich,
Wikimedia Commons)
part (a).
13 . A car’s bumper is designed to withstand a 17 . (a) How much gravitational potential energy
4.0-km/h (1.12-m/s) collision with an (relative to the ground on which it is built) is
immovable object without damage to the body stored in the Great Pyramid of Cheops, given
of the car. The bumper cushions the shock by that its mass is about and its center
absorbing the force over a distance. Calculate of mass is 36.5 m above the surrounding
the magnitude of the average force on a bumper ground? (b) How does this energy compare with
that collapses 0.200 m while bringing a 900-kg the daily food intake of a person?
car to rest from an initial speed of 1.12 m/s.
18 . Suppose a 350-g kookaburra (a large kingfisher
14 . Boxing gloves are padded to lessen the force of bird) picks up a 75-g snake and raises it 2.5 m
a blow. (a) Calculate the force exerted by a from the ground to a branch. (a) How much work
boxing glove on an opponent’s face, if the glove did the bird do on the snake? (b) How much
and face compress 7.50 cm during a blow in work did it do to raise its own center of mass to
which the 7.00-kg arm and glove are brought to the branch?
rest from an initial speed of 10.0 m/s. (b)
19 . In Example 7.7, we found that the speed of a
Calculate the force exerted by an identical blow
roller coaster that had descended 20.0 m was
in the days when no gloves were used and the
only slightly greater when it had an initial speed
knuckles and face would compress only 2.00
of 5.00 m/s than when it started from rest. This
cm. (c) Discuss the magnitude of the force with
implies that . Confirm this
glove on. Does it seem high enough to cause
statement by taking the ratio of to .
damage even though it is lower than the force
(Note that mass cancels.)
with no glove?
20 . A 100-g toy car is propelled by a compressed
15 . Using energy considerations, calculate the
spring that starts it moving. The car follows the
average force a 60.0-kg sprinter exerts
curved track in Figure 7.36. Show that the final
backward on the track to accelerate from 2.00 to
speed of the toy car is 0.687 m/s if its initial
8.00 m/s in a distance of 25.0 m, if he
speed is 2.00 m/s and it coasts up the
encounters a headwind that exerts an average
frictionless slope, gaining 0.180 m in altitude.
force of 30.0 N against him.

318 7 • Problems & Exercises
FIGURE 7.37 The skier’s initial kinetic energy is partially
used in coasting to the top of a rise.
25 . (a) How high a hill can a car coast up (engine
FIGURE 7.36 A toy car moves up a sloped track. (credit:
Leszek Leszczynski, Flickr) disengaged) if work done by friction is negligible
and its initial speed is 110 km/h? (b) If, in
21 . In a downhill ski race, surprisingly, little actuality, a 750-kg car with an initial speed of
advantage is gained by getting a running start. 110 km/h is observed to coast up a hill to a
(This is because the initial kinetic energy is small height 22.0 m above its starting point, how much
compared with the gain in gravitational potential thermal energy was generated by friction? (c)
energy on even small hills.) To demonstrate this, What is the average force of friction if the hill has
find the final speed and the time taken for a a slope above the horizontal?
skier who skis 70.0 m along a slope
7.6 Conservation of Energy
neglecting friction: (a) Starting from rest. (b)
Starting with an initial speed of 2.50 m/s. (c) 26 . Using values from Table 7.1, how many DNA
Does the answer surprise you? Discuss why it is molecules could be broken by the energy carried
still advantageous to get a running start in very by a single electron in the beam of an old-
competitive events. fashioned TV tube? (These electrons were not
dangerous in themselves, but they did create
7.4 Conservative Forces and Potential
dangerous x rays. Later model tube TVs had
Energy
shielding that absorbed x rays before they
22 . A subway train is brought to a escaped and exposed viewers.)
stop from a speed of 0.500 m/s in 0.400 m by a
27 . Using energy considerations and assuming
large spring bumper at the end of its track. What
negligible air resistance, show that a rock
is the force constant of the spring?
thrown from a bridge 20.0 m above water with
23 . A pogo stick has a spring with a force constant of an initial speed of 15.0 m/s strikes the water
× , which can be compressed 12.0 with a speed of 24.8 m/s independent of the
direction thrown.
cm. To what maximum height can a child jump
on the stick using only the energy in the spring, if 28 . If the energy in fusion bombs were used to
the child and stick have a total mass of 40.0 kg? supply the energy needs of the world, how many
Explicitly show how you follow the steps in the of the 9-megaton variety would be needed for a
Problem-Solving Strategies for Energy. year’s supply of energy (using data from Table
7.1)? This is not as far-fetched as it may
7.5 Nonconservative Forces
sound—there are thousands of nuclear bombs,
24 . A 60.0-kg skier with an initial speed of 12.0 m/s and their energy can be trapped in underground
coasts up a 2.50-m-high rise as shown in Figure explosions and converted to electricity, as
7.37. Find her final speed at the top, given that natural geothermal energy is.
the coefficient of friction between her skis and
29 . (a) Use of hydrogen fusion to supply energy is a
the snow is 0.0800. (Hint: Find the distance
dream that may be realized in the next century.
traveled up the incline assuming a straight-line
Fusion would be a relatively clean and almost
path as shown in the figure.)
limitless supply of energy, as can be seen from
Table 7.1. To illustrate this, calculate how many
years the present energy needs of the world
could be supplied by one millionth of the
oceans’ hydrogen fusion energy. (b) How does
this time compare with historically significant
Access for free at openstax.org

7 • Problems & Exercises 319
events, such as the duration of stable economic 34 . A large household air conditioner may consume
systems? 15.0 kW of power. What is the cost of operating
this air conditioner 3.00 h per day for 30.0 d if
7.7 Power
the cost of electricity is $0.110 per ?
30 . The Crab Nebula (see Figure 7.38) pulsar is the
35 . (a) What is the average power consumption in
remnant of a supernova that occurred in A.D.
watts of an appliance that uses of
1054. Using data from Table 7.3, calculate the
energy per day? (b) How many joules of energy
approximate factor by which the power output of
does this appliance consume in a year?
this astronomical object has declined since its
explosion. 36 . (a) What is the average useful power output of a
person who does × of useful work in
8.00 h? (b) Working at this rate, how long will it
take this person to lift 2000 kg of bricks 1.50 m
to a platform? (Work done to lift his body can be
omitted because it is not considered useful
output here.)
37 . A 500-kg dragster accelerates from rest to a
final speed of 110 m/s in 400 m (about a quarter
of a mile) and encounters an average frictional
force of 1200 N. What is its average power
output in watts and horsepower if this takes
7.30 s?
38 . (a) How long will it take an 850-kg car with a
useful power output of 40.0 hp (1 hp = 746 W)
FIGURE 7.38 Crab Nebula (credit: ESO, via Wikimedia
to reach a speed of 15.0 m/s, neglecting
Commons)
friction? (b) How long will this acceleration take
31 . Suppose a star 1000 times brighter than our Sun if the car also climbs a 3.00-m-high hill in the
(that is, emitting 1000 times the power) process?
suddenly goes supernova. Using data from Table
39 . (a) Find the useful power output of an elevator
7.3: (a) By what factor does its power output
motor that lifts a 2500-kg load a height of 35.0
increase? (b) How many times brighter than our
m in 12.0 s, if it also increases the speed from
entire Milky Way galaxy is the supernova? (c)
rest to 4.00 m/s. Note that the total mass of the
Based on your answers, discuss whether it
counterbalanced system is 10,000 kg—so that
should be possible to observe supernovas in
only 2500 kg is raised in height, but the full
distant galaxies. Note that there are on the order
10,000 kg is accelerated. (b) What does it cost, if
of observable galaxies, the average
electricity is $0.0900 per ?
brightness of which is somewhat less than our
own galaxy. 40 . (a) What is the available energy content, in
joules, of a battery that operates a 2.00-W
32 . A person in good physical condition can put out
electric clock for 18 months? (b) How long can a
100 W of useful power for several hours at a
battery that can supply × run a pocket
stretch, perhaps by pedaling a mechanism that
drives an electric generator. Neglecting any calculator that consumes energy at the rate of
problems of generator efficiency and practical × ?
considerations such as resting time: (a) How
many people would it take to run a 4.00-kW 41 . (a) How long would it take a × -kg
electric clothes dryer? (b) How many people
airplane with engines that produce 100 MW of
would it take to replace a large electric power
power to reach a speed of 250 m/s and an
plant that generates 800 MW?
altitude of 12.0 km if air resistance were
33 . What is the cost of operating a 3.00-W electric negligible? (b) If it actually takes 900 s, what is
clock for a year if the cost of electricity is the power? (c) Given this power, what is the
$0.0900 per ? average force of air resistance if the airplane

320 7 • Problems & Exercises
takes 1200 s? (Hint: You must find the distance
the plane travels in 1200 s assuming constant
acceleration.)
42 . Calculate the power output needed for a 950-kg
car to climb a slope at a constant 30.0 m/s
while encountering wind resistance and friction
totaling 600 N. Explicitly show how you follow
the steps in the Problem-Solving Strategies for
Energy.
43 . (a) Calculate the power per square meter
reaching Earth’s upper atmosphere from the
Sun. (Take the power output of the Sun to be
(b) Part of this is absorbed and FIGURE 7.39 Shot putter at the Dornoch Highland
reflected by the atmosphere, so that a maximum Gathering in 2007. (credit: John Haslam, Flickr)
of reaches Earth’s surface.
47 . (a) What is the efficiency of an out-of-condition
Calculate the area in of solar energy
person who does × of useful work
collectors needed to replace an electric power
plant that generates 750 MW if the collectors while metabolizing 500 kcal of food energy? (b)
convert an average of 2.00% of the maximum How many food calories would a well-
power into electricity. (This small conversion conditioned athlete metabolize in doing the
efficiency is due to the devices themselves, and same work with an efficiency of 20%?
the fact that the sun is directly overhead only
48 . Energy that is not utilized for work or heat
briefly.) With the same assumptions, what area
transfer is converted to the chemical energy of
would be needed to meet the United States’
body fat containing about 39 kJ/g. How many
energy needs Australia’s
grams of fat will you gain if you eat 10,000 kJ
energy needs China’s energy
(about 2500 kcal) one day and do nothing but sit
needs (These energy
relaxed for 16.0 h and sleep for the other 8.00
consumption values are from 2006.)
h? Use data from Table 7.5 for the energy
7.8 Work, Energy, and Power in Humans consumption rates of these activities.
44 . (a) How long can you rapidly climb stairs (116/ 49 . Using data from Table 7.5, calculate the daily
min) on the 93.0 kcal of energy in a 10.0-g pat of energy needs of a person who sleeps for 7.00 h,
butter? (b) How many flights is this if each flight walks for 2.00 h, attends classes for 4.00 h,
has 16 stairs? cycles for 2.00 h, sits relaxed for 3.00 h, and
studies for 6.00 h. (Studying consumes energy at
45 . (a) What is the power output in watts and
the same rate as sitting in class.)
horsepower of a 70.0-kg sprinter who
accelerates from rest to 10.0 m/s in 3.00 s? (b) 50 . What is the efficiency of a subject on a treadmill
Considering the amount of power generated, do who puts out work at the rate of 100 W while
you think a well-trained athlete could do this consuming oxygen at the rate of 2.00 L/min?
repetitively for long periods of time? (Hint: See Table 7.5.)
46 . Calculate the power output in watts and 51 . Shoveling snow can be extremely taxing
horsepower of a shot-putter who takes 1.20 s to because the arms have such a low efficiency in
accelerate the 7.27-kg shot from rest to 14.0 m/ this activity. Suppose a person shoveling a
s, while raising it 0.800 m. (Do not include the footpath metabolizes food at the rate of 800 W.
power produced to accelerate his body.) (a) What is her useful power output? (b) How
long will it take her to lift 3000 kg of snow 1.20
m? (This could be the amount of heavy snow on
20 m of footpath.) (c) How much waste heat
transfer in kilojoules will she generate in the
process?
52 . Very large forces are produced in joints when a
Access for free at openstax.org

7 • Problems & Exercises 321
person jumps from some height to the ground. average horizontal backward force of 80.0 N
(a) Calculate the magnitude of the force with his arm during each 1.80 m long stroke. (a)
produced if an 80.0-kg person jumps from a What is his work output in each stroke? (b)
0.600–m-high ledge and lands stiffly, Calculate the power output of his arms if he does
compressing joint material 1.50 cm as a result. 120 strokes per minute.
(Be certain to include the weight of the person.)
(b) In practice the knees bend almost
involuntarily to help extend the distance over
which you stop. Calculate the magnitude of the
force produced if the stopping distance is 0.300
m. (c) Compare both forces with the weight of
the person.
FIGURE 7.41
53 . Jogging on hard surfaces with insufficiently
padded shoes produces large forces in the feet
57 . Mountain climbers carry bottled oxygen when at
and legs. (a) Calculate the magnitude of the
very high altitudes. (a) Assuming that a
force needed to stop the downward motion of a
mountain climber uses oxygen at twice the rate
jogger’s leg, if his leg has a mass of 13.0 kg, a
for climbing 116 stairs per minute (because of
speed of 6.00 m/s, and stops in a distance of
low air temperature and winds), calculate how
1.50 cm. (Be certain to include the weight of the
many liters of oxygen a climber would need for
75.0-kg jogger’s body.) (b) Compare this force
10.0 h of climbing. (These are liters at sea level.)
with the weight of the jogger.
Note that only 40% of the inhaled oxygen is
54 . (a) Calculate the energy in kJ used by a 55.0-kg utilized; the rest is exhaled. (b) How much useful
person who does 50 deep knee bends in which work does the climber do if he and his
their center of mass is lowered and raised 0.400 equipment have a mass of 90.0 kg and he gains
m. (They do work in both directions.) You may 1000 m of altitude? (c) What is his efficiency for
assume their efficiency is 20%. (b) What is the the 10.0-h climb?
average power consumption rate in watts if they
58 . The awe-inspiring Great Pyramid of Cheops was
do this in 3.00 min?
built more than 4500 years ago. Its square base,
55 . Kanellos Kanellopoulos flew 119 km from Crete originally 230 m on a side, covered 13.1 acres,
to Santorini, Greece, on April 23, 1988, in the and it was 146 m high, with a mass of about
Daedalus 88, an aircraft powered by a bicycle- . (The pyramid’s dimensions are
type drive mechanism (see Figure 7.40). His slightly different today due to quarrying and
useful power output for the 234-min trip was some sagging.) Historians estimate that 20,000
about 350 W. Using the efficiency for cycling workers spent 20 years to construct it, working
from Table 7.2, calculate the food energy in 12-hour days, 330 days per year. (a) Calculate
kilojoules he metabolized during the flight. the gravitational potential energy stored in the
pyramid, given its center of mass is at one-fourth
its height. (b) Only a fraction of the workers lifted
blocks; most were involved in support services
such as building ramps (see Figure 7.42),
bringing food and water, and hauling blocks to
the site. Calculate the efficiency of the workers
who did the lifting, assuming there were 1000 of
them and they consumed food energy at the rate
of 300 kcal/h. What does your answer imply
about how much of their work went into block-
lifting, versus how much work went into friction
and lifting and lowering their own bodies? (c)
FIGURE 7.40 The Daedalus 88 in flight. (credit: NASA Calculate the mass of food that had to be
photo by Beasley)
supplied each day, assuming that the average
worker required 3600 kcal per day and that their
56 . The swimmer shown in Figure 7.41 exerts an
diet was 5% protein, 60% carbohydrate, and

322 7 • Problems & Exercises
35% fat. (These proportions neglect the mass of resistance when he reaches a level area, how
bulk and nondigestible materials consumed.) long will it take him to reach a velocity of 10.0
m/s?
62 . Integrated Concepts
The 70.0-kg swimmer in Figure 7.41 starts a
race with an initial velocity of 1.25 m/s and
exerts an average force of 80.0 N backward with
his arms during each 1.80 m long stroke. (a)
What is his initial acceleration if water resistance
is 45.0 N? (b) What is the subsequent average
resistance force from the water during the 5.00 s
it takes him to reach his top velocity of 2.50 m/
FIGURE 7.42 Ancient pyramids were probably constructed s? (c) Discuss whether water resistance seems
using ramps as simple machines. (credit: Franck Monnier,
to increase linearly with velocity.
Wikimedia Commons)
63 . Integrated Concepts
59 . (a) How long can you play tennis on the 800 kJ
A toy gun uses a spring with a force constant of
(about 200 kcal) of energy in a candy bar? (b)
300 N/m to propel a 10.0-g steel ball. If the
Does this seem like a long time? Discuss why
spring is compressed 7.00 cm and friction is
exercise is necessary but may not be sufficient
negligible: (a) How much force is needed to
to cause a person to lose weight.
compress the spring? (b) To what maximum
7.9 World Energy Use height can the ball be shot? (c) At what angles
above the horizontal may a child aim to hit a
60 . Integrated Concepts target 3.00 m away at the same height as the
(a) Calculate the force the woman in Figure 7.43 gun? (d) What is the gun’s maximum range on
exerts to do a push-up at constant speed, taking level ground?
all data to be known to three digits. (b) How
64 . Integrated Concepts
much work does she do if her center of mass
(a) What force must be supplied by an elevator
rises 0.240 m? (c) What is her useful power
output if she does 25 push-ups in 1 min? cable to produce an acceleration of
(Should work done lowering her body be against a 200-N frictional force, if the mass of
included? See the discussion of useful work in the loaded elevator is 1500 kg? (b) How much
Work, Energy, and Power in Humans. work is done by the cable in lifting the elevator
20.0 m? (c) What is the final speed of the
elevator if it starts from rest? (d) How much
work went into thermal energy?
65 . Unreasonable Results
A car advertisement claims that its 900-kg car
accelerated from rest to 30.0 m/s and drove 100
km, gaining 3.00 km in altitude, on 1.0 gal of
gasoline. The average force of friction including
FIGURE 7.43 Forces involved in doing push-ups. The
air resistance was 700 N. Assume all values are
woman’s weight acts as a force exerted downward on her
center of gravity (CG). known to three significant figures. (a) Calculate
the car’s efficiency. (b) What is unreasonable
61 . Integrated Concepts about the result? (c) Which premise is
A 75.0-kg cross-country skier is climbing a unreasonable, or which premises are
slope at a constant speed of 2.00 m/s and inconsistent?
encounters air resistance of 25.0 N. Find his
66 . Unreasonable Results
power output for work done against the
Body fat is metabolized, supplying 9.30 kcal/g,
gravitational force and air resistance. (b) What
when dietary intake is less than needed to fuel
average force does he exert backward on the
metabolism. The manufacturers of an exercise
snow to accomplish this? (c) If he continues to
bicycle claim that you can metabolize 0.500 kg
exert this force and to experience the same air
of fat per day by vigorously exercising for 2.00 h
Access for free at openstax.org

7 • Problems & Exercises 323
per day on their machine. (a) How many kcal are 0.400 m while waiting to jump. After exerting a
supplied by the metabolization of 0.500 kg of force on the floor through this 0.400 m, their
fat? (b) Calculate the kcal/min that you would feet leave the floor and their center of gravity
have to utilize to metabolize fat at the rate of rises 0.950 m above its normal standing erect
0.500 kg in 2.00 h. (c) What is unreasonable position. (a) Using energy considerations,
about the results? (d) Which premise is calculate the player's velocity when they leave
unreasonable, or which premises are the floor. (b) What average force did the player
inconsistent? exert on the floor? (Do not neglect the force to
support their weight as well as that to accelerate
67 . Construct Your Own Problem
them.) (c) What was the player's power output
Consider a person climbing and descending
during the acceleration phase?
stairs. Construct a problem in which you
calculate the long-term rate at which stairs can 70 . Critical Thinking Two boxes of the same mass
be climbed considering the mass of the person, are pressed against pistons that compress and
his ability to generate power with his legs, and release the boxes on frictionless surfaces. Box
the height of a single stair step. Also consider A’s piston has a constant force F over a distance
why the same person can descend stairs at a x before the box is released while box B starts at
faster rate for a nearly unlimited time in spite of zero force and increases linearly to a force of 2F
the fact that very similar forces are exerted before releasing the box at a distance of 1/2d.
going down as going up. (This points to a (a) Which of these boxes has the greatest speed
fundamentally different process for descending after releasing from the piston? (b) Based on
versus climbing stairs.) experimental data for trials similar to box A, an
equation that fits the data is suggested for the
68 . Construct Your Own Problem
change in kinetic energy, , which may not
Consider humans generating electricity by
be correct: , where K is a
pedaling a device similar to a stationary bicycle.
constant with appropriate units, F is the applied
Construct a problem in which you determine the
force, and x is the distance the piston moves in
number of people it would take to replace a
contact with the box. Is this equation consistent
large electrical generation facility. Among the
with your answer from part a? Explain why or
things to consider are the power output that is
why not. Does this equation make sense?
reasonable using the legs, rest time, and the
Explain why or why not. (c) If the applied force
need for electricity 24 hours per day. Discuss the
of the piston is proportional to the distance in
practical implications of your results.
contact with the box, graph the work done on
69 . Integrated Concepts the box vs. the distance in contact with the
A 105-kg basketball player crouches down piston and box.

324 7 • Problems & Exercises
Access for free at openstax.org
