This cell phone has an attachment that measures a person’s blood sugar level, and plots it over a period
of days. All electronic devices contain circuits that are dc, at least in part. The circuit diagram below
shows a possible amplifier circuit for an audio output (cell
phone ear piece). We have already met two of the circuit
elements shown: resistors and capacitors, and we discuss them
in circuits in this Chapter. (The large triangle is an amplifier
chip containing transistors.) We also discuss how voltmeters
and ammeters work, and how measurements affect the
quantity being measured.

2.2 mF

Input to
each
channel

50 kΩ

2.2 mF

IC3

470 mF

470 mF

0.1 mF

47 kΩ

2.2 mF

2.7 kΩ

15 V

Headset or speaker
8 Ω

A P T

E

H

R

19C

CONTENTS

19–1 EMF and Terminal Voltage
19–2 Resistors in Series and in

Parallel

19–3 Kirchhoff’s Rules
19–4 EMFs in Series and in Parallel;

Charging a Battery

19–5 Circuits Containing Capacitors
in Series and in Parallel

19–6 RC Circuits—Resistor and
Capacitor in Series

19–7 Electric Hazards
19–8 Ammeters and Voltmeters—

Measurement Affects the
Quantity Being Measured

TABLE 19–1 Symbols for
Circuit Elements

Symbol

Device

Battery

or

Capacitor

Resistor

Wire with negligible

resistance

Switch

Ground

or

526

DC Circuits

CHAPTER-OPENING QUESTION—Guess now!
The automobile headlight bulbs
shown in the circuits here are
identical. The battery connection
which produces more light is

(a) circuit 1.
(b) circuit 2.
(c) both the same.
(d) not enough information.

+

–

Circuit 1

+

–

Circuit 2

E lectric circuits are basic parts of all electronic devices from cell phones and

TV sets to computers and automobiles. Scientific measurements—whether in
physics, biology, or medicine—make use of electric circuits. In Chapter 18,
we discussed the basic principles of electric current. Now we apply these princi-
ples  to  analyze  dc  circuits  involving  combinations  of  batteries, resistors, and
capacitors. We also study the operation of some useful instruments.†

When we draw a diagram for a circuit, we represent batteries, capacitors, and
resistors by the symbols shown in Table 19–1. Wires whose resistance is negligible
compared with other resistance in the circuit are drawn as straight lines. A ground
symbol  (
)  may  mean  a  real  connection  to  the  ground, perhaps  via  a
metal pipe, or it may mean a common connection, such as the frame of a car.

or

For the most part in this Chapter, except in Section 19–6 on RC circuits, we
will be interested in circuits operating in their steady state. We won’t be looking at a
circuit at the moment a change is made in it, such as when a battery or resistor is con-
nected or disconnected, but only when the currents have reached their steady values.
†AC circuits that contain only a voltage source and resistors can be analyzed like the dc circuits in this
Chapter. However, ac circuits that contain capacitors and other circuit elements are more compli-
cated, and we discuss them in Chapter 21.

19–1 EMF and Terminal Voltage

e

To have current in an electric circuit, we need a device such as a battery or an electric
generator that transforms one type of energy (chemical, mechanical, or light, for
example) into electric energy. Such a device is called a source of electromotive force†
or of emf. The potential difference between the terminals of such a source, when
e
no current flows to an external circuit, is called the emf of the source. The symbol
is usually used for emf (don’t confuse  with E for electric field), and its unit is volts.
A battery is not a source of constant current—the current out of a battery
varies according to the resistance in the circuit. A battery is, however, a nearly
constant voltage source, but not perfectly constant as we now discuss. For example,
if you start a car with the headlights on, you may notice the headlights dim. This
happens because the starter draws a large current, and the battery voltage drops below
its rated emf as a result. The voltage drop occurs because the chemical reactions in
a battery cannot supply charge fast enough to maintain the full emf. For one thing,
charge must move (within the electrolyte) between the electrodes of the battery,
and there is always some hindrance to completely free flow. Thus, a battery itself
has some resistance, which is called its internal resistance; it is usually designated r.
in series with a resistor r,
as shown in Fig. 19–1. Since this resistance r is inside the battery, we can never sepa-
rate it from the battery. The two points a and b in Fig. 19–1 represent the two
Vab = Va - Vb .
terminals of the battery. What we measure is the terminal voltage
When no current is drawn from the battery, the terminal voltage equals the emf,
However,
which is determined by the chemical reactions in the battery:
when  a  current  I flows  from  the  battery  there  is  an  internal  drop  in  voltage
equal to Ir. Thus the terminal voltage (the actual voltage applied to a circuit) is

A real battery is modeled as if it were a perfect emf

Vab = e.

e

Vab = e - Ir.

then when 10 A
For example, if a 12-V battery has an internal resistance of
flows from the battery, the terminal voltage is
The
internal resistance of a battery is usually small. For example, an ordinary flashlight
(However, as
battery when fresh may have an internal resistance of perhaps
it ages and the electrolyte dries out, the internal resistance increases to many ohms.)

0.05 (cid:2).

[current I flows from battery]  (19;1)
0.1 (cid:2),
12 V - (10 A)(0.1 (cid:2)) = 11 V.

65.0-(cid:2)

Battery with internal resistance. A

EXAMPLE 19;1
resistor is
connected to the terminals of a battery whose emf is 12.0 V and whose internal
0.5 (cid:2),
Fig. 19–2. Calculate (a) the current in the circuit, (b) the
resistance is
terminal voltage of the battery,
and (c) the power dissipated in the resistor R
and in the battery’s internal resistance r.
APPROACH We first consider the battery as a whole, which is shown in Fig. 19–2
and internal resistance r between points a and b. Then we apply
as an emf
V = IR
SOLUTION (a) From Eq. 19–1, we have
(Eq. 18–2) to this battery and the resistance R of the circuit:

We apply Ohm’s law
Hence

Vab = e - Ir.

to the circuit itself.

Vab = IR.

Vab ,

e

C A U T I O N
Why battery voltage isn’t perfectly
constant

Vab =
terminal voltage

e

r

–

b

+

a

FIGURE 19–1 Diagram for an
electric cell or battery.

FIGURE 19–2 Example 19–1.

R = 65.0 Ω

I

a

r =
0.5 Ω

b

e =
12.0 V

or

e = I(R + r).

e - Ir = IR
So
e
R + r

I =

=

12.0 V
65.0 (cid:2) + 0.5 (cid:2)

= 12.0 V
65.5 (cid:2)

= 0.183 A.

(b) The terminal voltage is

Vab = e - Ir = 12.0 V - (0.183 A)(0.5 (cid:2)) = 11.9 V.

(c) The power dissipated in R (Eq. 18–6) is

P
R

= I2R = (0.183 A)2(65.0 (cid:2)) = 2.18 W,

and in the battery’s resistance r it is

P
r

= I2r = (0.183 A)2(0.5 (cid:2)) = 0.02 W.

†The term “electromotive force” is a misnomer—it does not refer to a “force” that is measured in
newtons. To avoid confusion, we use the abbreviation, emf.

SECTION 19–1 EMF and Terminal Voltage

527

R1

V1

I

(a)

R2

V2

+

–

V

R3

V3

Unless stated otherwise, we assume the battery’s internal resistance is negligible,
and the battery voltage given is its terminal voltage, which we will usually write
as V rather than
Do not confuse V (italic) for voltage, with V (not italic) for
the volt unit.

Vab .

19–2 Resistors in Series and in Parallel

When  two  or  more  resistors  are  connected  end  to  end  along  a  single  path  as
shown in Fig. 19–3a, they are said to be connected in series. The resistors could
be  simple  resistors  as  were  pictured  in  Fig. 18–11, or  they  could  be  lightbulbs
(Fig. 19–3b), or  heating  elements, or  other  resistive  devices. Any  charge  that
Hence the
passes through
same current I passes through each resistor. (If it did not, this would imply that
either charge was not conserved, or that charge was accumulating at some point
in the circuit, which does not happen in the steady state.)

in Fig. 19–3a will also pass through

and then

R
2

3 .

R

R

1

We let V represent the potential difference (voltage) across all three resistors
in Fig. 19–3a. We assume all other resistance in the circuit can be ignored, so V
1 , V
V
2 ,
equals the terminal voltage supplied by the battery. We let
and
be the
R
1 , R
and
2 ,
respectively.
potential  differences  across  each  of  the  resistors,
3 ,
= IR3 .
V
= IR2 ,
From  Ohm’s  law,
and
2
Because the resistors are connected end to end, energy conservation tells us that
the total voltage V is equal to the sum of the voltages across each resistor:

R
= IR1 ,

we  can  write

V = IR,

V
3

V
1

V
3

V = V
1

+ V
2

+ V
3

= IR1

+ IR2

+ IR3 .

[series] (19;2)

Now let us determine the equivalent single resistance

that would draw
the same current I as our combination of three resistors in series; see Fig. 19–3c.
would be related to V by
Such a single resistance

Req

Req

V = IReq .
We equate this expression with Eq. 19–2,

V = IAR
1

+ R

+ R
3

B,

2

and find

Req = R
1

+ R
2

+ R

3.

[series] (19;3)

When  we  put  several  resistances  in  series, the  total  or  equivalent  resistance
is  the  sum  of  the  separate  resistances. (Sometimes  we  call  it “net  resistance.”)
This sum applies to any number of resistances in series. Note that when you add
more resistance to the circuit, the current through the circuit will decrease. For
4-(cid:2)
resistor, the current will be 3 A.
example, if a 12-V battery is connected to a
4-(cid:2)
But  if  the  12-V  battery  is  connected  to  three
resistors  in  series, the  total
resistance is

and the current through the entire circuit will be only 1 A.

12 (cid:2)

Another way to connect resistors is in parallel, so that the current from the source
splits into separate branches or paths (Fig. 19–4a). Wiring in houses and buildings is
arranged so all electric devices are in parallel, as we saw in Chapter 18, Fig. 18–20.
in Fig. 19–4a), the cur-
With parallel wiring, if you disconnect one device (say,
rent to the other devices is not interrupted. Compare to a series circuit, where if
in Fig. 19–3a) is disconnected, the current is stopped to all others.
one device (say,
In  a  parallel  circuit, Fig. 19–4a, the  total  current  I that  leaves  the  battery
1 , I
I
2 ,
splits into three separate paths. We let
and  be the currents through each
1 , R
respectively. Because electric charge is conserved,
of the resistors,
the  current  I flowing  into  junction A  (where  the  different  wires  or  conductors
meet, Fig. 19–4a) must equal the current flowing out of the junction. Thus

and

R
1

R
1

I
3

3 ,

2 ,

R

R

I = I
1

+ I
2

+ I

3 .

[parallel]

When  resistors  are  connected  in  parallel, each  has  the  same  voltage  across  it.
(Indeed, any two points in a circuit connected by a wire of negligible resistance
are at the same potential.) Hence the full voltage of the battery is applied to each
resistor in Fig. 19–4a. Applying Ohm’s law to each resistor, we have
V
R
2

V
R
1
Let  us  now  determine  what  single  resistor

,  and   I
Req

(Fig. 19–4c)  will  draw  the  same

,  I

V
R

I
1

=

=

=

.

3

3

2

(b)

I

(c)

Battery

Req

+

–

V

FIGURE 19–3 (a) Resistances
connected in series. (b) Resistances
could be lightbulbs, or any other
type of resistance. (c) Equivalent
single resistance
same current: Req = R
1

that draws the
+ R

+ R
2

Req

3 .

FIGURE 19–4 (a) Resistances
connected in parallel. (b) Resistances
could be lightbulbs. (c) The equivalent
obtained from Eq. 19–4:
circuit with
1
+ 1
= 1
R
R
Req
2
1

+ 1
R
3

Req

.

I1

I2

I3

R1

R2

R3

A

(a)

I

+

–

V

B

(b)

(c)

+

–

Req

I

+

–

V

528 CHAPTER 19 DC Circuits

current I as  these  three  resistances  in  parallel. This  equivalent  resistance
must satisfy Ohm’s law too:

Req

I =

V
Req

.

We now combine the equations above:
I = I
1
V
R

+ I
2
V
R
2

V
Req

V
R
3

+ I

3 ,

=

+

+

.

1

When we divide out the V from each term, we have

1
Req

= 1
R

1

+ 1
R
2

+ 1
R
3

.

[parallel] (19;4)

For example, suppose you connect two
set of output terminals of an amplifier. The equivalent resistance of the two
“resistors” in parallel is

loudspeakers in parallel to a single
4-(cid:2)

4-(cid:2)

=

1
4 (cid:2)

+ 1
4 (cid:2)

=

2
4 (cid:2)

=

1
2 (cid:2)

,

1
Req
Req = 2 (cid:2).

and so
Thus the net (or equivalent) resistance is less than each single
resistance. This may at first seem surprising. But remember that when you connect
resistors in parallel, you are giving the current additional paths to follow. Hence
the net resistance will be less.†

Equations 19–3 and 19–4 make good sense. Recalling Eq. 18–3 for resistivity,
R = rl(cid:2)A,
we see that placing resistors in series effectively increases the length
and therefore the resistance; putting resistors in parallel effectively increases the
area through which current flows, thus reducing the overall resistance.

Note that whenever a group of resistors is replaced by the equivalent resistance,

current and voltage and power in the rest of the circuit are unaffected.

EXERCISE A You  have  a
equivalent resistance that you can make with these two resistors?

and  a

10-(cid:2)

15-(cid:2)

resistor. What  is  the  smallest  and  largest

CONCEPTUAL EXAMPLE 19;2
Series or parallel? (a) The lightbulbs in
Fig. 19–5 are identical. Which configuration produces more light? (b) Which way
do you think the headlights of a car are wired? Ignore change of filament
resistance R with current.

FIGURE 19–5 Example 19–2.

Thus
(=  R(cid:2)2)

1(cid:2)Req = 1(cid:2)R + 1(cid:2)R = 2(cid:2)R.

RESPONSE (a) The equivalent resistance of the parallel circuit is found from
Req = R(cid:2)2.
Eq. 19–4,
The  parallel  com-
than  the  series  combination
bination  then  has  lower  resistance
AReq = R + R = 2RB.
There will be more total current in the parallel configu-
ration (2), since
and V is the same for both circuits. The total power
transformed, which is related to the light produced, is
so the greater
current in (2) means more light is produced.
(b) Headlights are wired in parallel (2), because if one bulb goes out, the other bulb
can stay lit. If they were in series (1), when one bulb burned out (the filament broke),
the circuit would be open and no current would flow, so neither bulb would light.

I = V(cid:2)Req

P = IV,

+

12 V

–

+

12 V

–

(1) Series

(2) Parallel

EXERCISE B Return to the Chapter-Opening Question, page 526, and answer it
again now. Try to explain why you may have answered differently the first time.

†An analogy may help. Consider two identical pipes taking in water near the top of a dam and releas-
ing it at the bottom as shown in the figure to the right. If both pipes are open, rather than only one,
twice as much water will flow through. That is, the net resistance to the flow of water will be reduced
by half with two equal pipes open, just as for electrical resistors in parallel.

SECTION 19–2 Resistors in Series and in Parallel

529

V = 24.0 V

I

I1

I2

R1

R2

(a)

V = 24.0 V

I

R1

R2

(b)

FIGURE 19–6 Example 19–3.

FIGURE 19–7 (a) Circuit for
Examples 19–4 and 19–5.
(b) Equivalent circuit, showing the
290 (cid:2)
equivalent resistance of
the two parallel resistors in (a).
I1

for

500 Ω

400 Ω

a

b

700 Ω

I2

c

I

I

(a)

 12.0 V

a

400 Ω

b

RP =
290 Ω

c

100-(cid:2)

Series and parallel resistors. Two

EXAMPLE 19;3
resistors are con-
nected (a) in parallel, and (b) in series, to a 24.0-V battery (Fig. 19–6). What is the
current through each resistor and what is the equivalent resistance of each circuit?
APPROACH We use Ohm’s law and the ideas just discussed for series and parallel
connections to get the current in each case. We can also use Eqs. 19–3 and 19–4.
SOLUTION (a) Any given charge (or electron) can flow through only one or
the other of the two resistors in Fig. 19–6a. Just as a river may break into two
streams  when  going  around  an  island, here  too  the  total  current  I from  the
battery (Fig. 19–6a) splits to flow through each resistor, so I equals the sum of
the separate currents through the two resistors:
+ I

I = I
1

2 .

The potential difference across each resistor is the battery voltage
Applying Ohm’s law to each resistor gives

V = 24.0 V.

I = I
1

+ I
2

=

V
R

1

+

V
R
2

= 24.0 V
100 (cid:2)

+ 24.0 V
100 (cid:2)

The equivalent resistance is

Req =

V
I

= 24.0 V
0.48 A

= 50 (cid:2).

= 0.24 A + 0.24 A = 0.48 A.

We could also have obtained this result from Eq. 19–4:
1
50 (cid:2)

2
100 (cid:2)

1
100 (cid:2)

1
100 (cid:2)

=

=

+

=

,

1
Req
Req = 50 (cid:2).

so
and then
(b) All the current that flows out of the battery passes first through
because they lie along a single path, Fig. 19–6b. So the current I is
through
the same in both resistors; the potential difference V across the battery equals
the total change in potential across the two resistors:

R
1

R
2

Ohm’s law gives

I =

V = V
1

+ V
2 .
+ IR2
V = IR1
V
+ R
2

R

=

1

+ R
2

B.

= IAR

1
24.0 V
100 (cid:2) + 100 (cid:2)

Hence

= 0.120 A.

The  equivalent  resistance, using  Eq. 19–3,
can  also  get
Req
resistance

We
is
Req
by  thinking  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  battery: the  total
must equal the battery voltage divided by the current it delivers:

Req = R
1

= 200 (cid:2).

+ R

2

V
I

Req =

= 24.0 V
0.120 A
V
R
= (0.120 A)(100 (cid:2)) = 12.0 V,
= IR1
is
and that
1
1
= 12.0 V,
each being half of the battery voltage. A simple

NOTE The voltage across
V
across
2
circuit like Fig. 19–6b is thus often called a simple voltage divider.

= 200 (cid:2).

= IR2

R
2

is

Circuit with series and parallel resistors. How much

EXAMPLE 19;4
current is drawn from the battery shown in Fig. 19–7a?
APPROACH The current I that flows out of the battery all passes through the
400-(cid:2)
I
and
and
resistor, but then it splits into
1
700-(cid:2)
resistors. The latter two resistors are in parallel with each other. We look
for something that we already know how to treat. So let’s start by finding the
equivalent resistance,
Then we
of the parallel resistors,
R
can consider this
P
SOLUTION The equivalent resistance,
parallel is

to be in series with the
RP ,

500 (cid:2)
resistor.
500-(cid:2)

passing through the

400-(cid:2)
of the

resistors in

700 (cid:2).

700-(cid:2)

500-(cid:2)

RP ,

and

and

I
2

=

1
500 (cid:2)

+

1
700 (cid:2)

1
RP
1(cid:2)RP ,

so we take the reciprocal to find RP .

= 0.0020 (cid:2)–1 + 0.0014 (cid:2)–1 = 0.0034 (cid:2)–1.

(b)

12.0 V

530 CHAPTER 19 DC Circuits

This is

It is a common mistake to forget to take this reciprocal. The units of reciprocal
ohms,

are a reminder. Thus

(cid:2)–1,

RP =

1
0.0034 (cid:2)–1

= 290 (cid:2).

290 (cid:2)

This
400-(cid:2)
with the
lent resistance

is the equivalent resistance of the two parallel resistors, and is in series
resistor (see equivalent circuit, Fig. 19–7b). To find the total equiva-
Req ,
resistances, since they are in series:

400-(cid:2)

and

we add the

290-(cid:2)
Req = 400 (cid:2) + 290 (cid:2) = 690 (cid:2).

The total current flowing from the battery is then

I =

V
Req

= 12.0 V
690 (cid:2)

= 0.0174 A L 17 mA.

NOTE This I is also the current flowing through the
the

resistor, but not through
resistors (both currents are less—see the next Example).

500-(cid:2)

700-(cid:2)

and

400-(cid:2)

I
Current in one branch. What is the current
1

through the

resistor, which is the voltage
is known, we can
V = IR,
to get the current. First we find the voltage across the
since we know that 17.4 mA passes through it (Example 19–4).

Once

Vbc .

Vbc

500-(cid:2)

resistor,

resistor in Fig. 19–7a?

EXAMPLE 19;5
500-(cid:2)
APPROACH We need the voltage across the
between points b and c in Fig. 19–7a, and we call it
apply Ohm’s law,
400-(cid:2)
SOLUTION

Vab ,
Vab
Vab = (0.0174 A)(400 (cid:2)) = 7.0 V.
The total voltage across the network of resistors is
12.0 V - 7.0 V = 5.0 V.
= 5.0 V
500 (cid:2)

can be found using

V = IR:

I
1

= 1.0 * 10–2 A = 10 mA.

Vac = 12.0 V,
I
Ohm’s law gives the current
through the
1

Vbc
so  must be
500-(cid:2)
resistor:

This is the answer we wanted. We can also calculate the current
700-(cid:2)

resistor since the voltage across it is also 5.0 V:

I
2

through the

I
2

= 5.0 V
700 (cid:2)

= 7 mA.

I
1

NOTE When
Fig. 19–7a), their sum is
as calculated in Example 19–4, as it should.

combines  with

10 mA + 7 mA = 17 mA.

to  form  the  total  current  I (at  point  c  in
This equals the total current I

I
2

CONCEPTUAL EXAMPLE 19;6
Bulb brightness in a circuit. The circuit
in Fig. 19–8 has three identical lightbulbs, each of resistance R. (a) When switch S
is closed, how will the brightness of bulbs A and B compare with that of bulb C?
(b) What happens when switch S is opened? Use a minimum of mathematics.

RESPONSE (a) With switch S closed, the current that passes through bulb C must
split into two equal parts when it reaches the junction leading to bulbs A and B
because the resistance of bulb A equals that of B. Thus, A and B each receive half
(P = I2R).
of C’s current; A and B will be equally bright, but less bright than C
(b) When the switch S is open, no current can flow through bulb A, so it will be
dark. Now, the  same  current  passes  through  bulbs  B  and  C, so  B  and  C  will
is greater
be equally bright. The equivalent resistance of this circuit
than that of the circuit with the switch closed, so the current leaving the battery
is reduced. Thus, bulb C will be dimmer when we open the switch, but bulb B
will be brighter because it gets more current when the switch is open (you may
want to use some mathematics here).

(=  R + R)

C A U T I O N
Remember to take the reciprocal

C

S

A

B

FIGURE 19–8 Example 19–6, three
identical lightbulbs. Each yellow
circle with
lightbulb and its resistance.

inside represents a

FIGURE 19–9 Exercise C.

(a)

60 W 100 W

(b)

60 W

EXERCISE C A 100-W, 120-V lightbulb and a 60-W, 120-V lightbulb are connected in
two different ways as shown in Fig. 19–9. In each case, which bulb glows more brightly?
Ignore change of filament resistance with current (and temperature).

120 V

100 W

120 V

SECTION 19–2 Resistors in Series and in Parallel

531

10.0 Ω

8.0 Ω

4.0 Ω

6.0 Ω

5.0 Ω

r = 0.50 Ω

a

(a)

b
e = 9.0 V

10.0 Ω

6.0 Ω

Req1 =
2.7 Ω

5.0 Ω

r = 0.50 Ω

(b)

e = 9.0 V

10.0 Ω

Req2 = 8.7 Ω

5.0 Ω

r = 0.50 Ω

(c)

e = 9.0 V

Req3 = 4.8 Ω

5.0 Ω

r = 0.50 Ω

(d)

e = 9.0 V
FIGURE 19–10 Circuit for
Example 19–7, where r is the
internal resistance of the battery.

6.0-(cid:2)

0.50 (cid:2)

EXAMPLE 19;7
Analyzing a circuit. A 9.0-V battery whose internal resis-
is connected in the circuit shown in Fig. 19–10a. (a) How much
tance r is
current is drawn from the battery? (b) What is the terminal voltage of the battery?
(c) What is the current in the
resistor?
APPROACH To find the current out of the battery, we first need to determine
the equivalent resistance
of the entire circuit, including r, which we do by
identifying  and  isolating  simple  series  or  parallel  combinations  of  resistors.
I = e(cid:2)Req ,
Once we find I from Ohm’s law,
we get the terminal voltage using
Vab = e - Ir.
SOLUTION (a) We want to determine the equivalent resistance of the circuit.
resistors are in parallel,
But where do we start? We note that the
Req1
and so have an equivalent resistance

For (c) we apply Ohm’s law to the

and
given by

resistor.

4.0-(cid:2)

8.0-(cid:2)

6.0-(cid:2)

Req

1
Req1

=

+

1
4.0 (cid:2)

=

3
8.0 (cid:2) ;

1
8.0 (cid:2)
2.7 (cid:2)

Req1 = 2.7 (cid:2).

so
resistor, as shown in the
is in series with the
equivalent  circuit  of  Fig. 19–10b. The  net  resistance  of  the  lower  arm  of  the
circuit is then

This

6.0-(cid:2)

Req2 = 6.0 (cid:2) + 2.7 (cid:2) = 8.7 (cid:2),

as shown in Fig. 19–10c. The equivalent resistance
resistances in parallel is given by

Req3

of the

8.7-(cid:2)

and

10.0-(cid:2)

1
Req3

=

1
10.0 (cid:2)

+

1
8.7 (cid:2)

= 0.21 (cid:2)–1,

Req3 = A1(cid:2)0.21 (cid:2)–1B = 4.8 (cid:2).

0.50-(cid:2)

so
and  the
equivalent resistance
Hence the current drawn is

Req

This

resistor
internal  resistance  of  the  battery  (Fig. 19–10d), so  the  total
Req = 4.8 (cid:2) + 5.0 (cid:2) + 0.50 (cid:2) = 10.3 (cid:2).

is  in  series  with  the

of the circuit is

5.0-(cid:2)

4.8 (cid:2)

I =

e
Req

= 9.0 V
10.3 (cid:2)

= 0.87 A.

(b) The terminal voltage of the battery is

Vab = e - Ir = 9.0 V - (0.87 A)(0.50 (cid:2)) = 8.6 V.

(c) Now we can work back and get the current in the
the  same  as  the  current  through  the
voltage  across  that
drops across r and the
Applying Ohm’s law, we get the current (call it

resistor. It must be
shown  in  Fig. 19–10c  (why?). The
will  be  the  emf  of  the  battery  minus  the  voltage
= 9.0 V - (0.87 A)(0.50 (cid:2) + 5.0 (cid:2)).

resistor:

5.0-(cid:2)

8.7 (cid:2)

8.7 (cid:2)

I¿

V

8.7

)

6.0-(cid:2)

I¿ =

9.0 V - (0.87 A)(0.50 (cid:2) + 5.0 (cid:2))
8.7 (cid:2)

= 0.48 A.

This is the current through the

6.0-(cid:2)

resistor.

FIGURE 19–11 Currents can be
calculated using Kirchhoff’s rules.
30 Ω

h

19–3 Kirchhoff’s Rules

I1

a

I2

40 Ω

I3

b

e
=
1
80 V

r =
1 Ω

g

f

r =
1 Ω

e
=
2
45 V

d

20 Ω

c

e

In the last few Examples we have been able to find the currents in circuits by com-
bining resistances in series and parallel, and using Ohm’s law. This technique can
be used for many circuits. However, some circuits are too complicated for that
analysis. For example, we cannot find the currents in each part of the circuit shown
in Fig. 19–11 simply by combining resistances as we did before.

To deal with complicated circuits, we use Kirchhoff’s rules, devised by G. R.
Kirchhoff (1824–1887) in the mid-nineteenth century. There are two rules, and they
are simply convenient applications of the laws of conservation of charge and energy.

532 CHAPTER 19 DC Circuits

Kirchhoff’s first rule or junction rule is based on the conservation of electric
charge (we already used it to derive the equation for parallel resistors). It states that

at  any  junction  point, the  sum  of  all  currents  entering  the  junction  must
equal the sum of all currents leaving the junction.

Junction rule
(conservation of charge)

That  is, whatever  charge  goes  in  must  come  out. For  example, at  the  junction
I
point a in Fig. 19–11,
is entering whereas  and  are leaving. Thus Kirchhoff’s
2
We already saw an instance of this in the
junction rule states that
NOTE at the end of Example 19–5.

= I
1

+ I

I
3

I
3

I
1

2 .

Kirchhoff’s second rule or loop rule is based on the conservation of energy.

It states that

the sum of the changes in potential around any closed loop of a circuit must
be zero.

Loop rule
(conservation of energy)

To see why this rule should hold, consider a rough analogy with the potential energy
of a roller coaster on its track. When the roller coaster starts from the station, it
has a particular potential energy. As it is pulled up the first hill, its gravitational
potential energy increases and reaches a maximum at the top. As it descends the
other  side, its  potential  energy  decreases  and  reaches  a  local  minimum  at  the
bottom of the hill. As the roller coaster continues on its up and down path, its poten-
tial energy goes through more changes. But when it arrives back at the starting
point, it has exactly as much potential energy as it had when it started at this point.
Another way of saying this is that there was as much uphill as there was downhill.
Similar reasoning can be applied to an electric circuit. We will analyze the circuit
of Fig. 19–11 shortly, but first we consider the simpler circuit in Fig. 19–12. We have
chosen it to be the same as the equivalent circuit of Fig. 19–7b already discussed.
The current in this circuit is
as we calculated in
Example 19–4. (We keep an extra digit in I to reduce rounding errors.) The positive
side  of  the  battery, point  e  in  Fig. 19–12a, is  at  a  high  potential  compared  to
point d at the negative side of the battery. That is, point e is like the top of a hill
for a roller coaster. We follow the current around the circuit starting at any point.
We choose to start at point d and follow a small positive test charge completely
around  this  circuit. As  we  go, we  note  all  changes  in  potential. When  the  test
charge returns to point d, the potential will be the same as when we started (total
change in potential around the circuit is zero). We plot the changes in potential
around the circuit in Fig. 19–12b; point d is arbitrarily taken as zero.

I = (12.0 V)(cid:2)(690 (cid:2)) = 0.0174 A,

As our positive test charge goes from point d, which is the negative or low
potential side of the battery, to point e, which is the positive terminal (high poten-
tial side) of the battery, the potential increases by 12.0 V. (This is like the roller
coaster being pulled up the first hill.) That is,
Ved = ±12.0 V.

Next, as the charge passes through the

When our test charge moves from point e to point a, there is no change in potential
because there is no source of emf and negligible resistance in the connecting wires.
resistor to get to point b, there
The positive
is a decrease in potential of
test charge is flowing “downhill” since it is heading toward the negative terminal
of the battery, as indicated in the graph of Fig. 19–12b. Because this is a decrease
in potential, we use a negative sign:

V = IR = (0.0174 A)(400 (cid:2)) = 7.0 V.

400-(cid:2)

Vba = Vb - Va = –7.0 V.

As the charge proceeds from b to c there is another potential decrease (a “voltage
and this too is a decrease in potential:
drop”) of

(0.0174 A) * (290 (cid:2)) = 5.0 V,

Vcb = –5.0 V.

There is no change in potential as our test charge moves from c to d as we assume
negligible resistance in the wires.

The sum of all the changes in potential around the circuit of Fig. 19–12 is

FIGURE 19–12 Changes in
potential around the circuit in (a)
are plotted in (b).

400 Ω

a

b

290 Ω

c

I

(a)

+ –

e

12.0 V

d

12

V

0
d

e

a

7.0 V

12.0 V

5.0 V

e

a

b

c

d

(b)

12.0 V

400 Ω 290 Ω

P R O B L E M   S O L V I N G

Be consistent with signs when
applying the loop rule

±12.0 V – 7.0 V - 5.0 V = 0.
This is exactly what Kirchhoff’s loop rule said it would be.

SECTION 19–3 Kirchhoff’s Rules

533

SOLV ING

M
E
L
B
O
R
P

Kirchhoff’s Rules

3

2 , I

1. Label  the  current in  each  separate  branch  of  the
given  circuit  with  a  different  subscript, such  as
1 , I
I
(see  Fig. 19–11  or  19–13). Each  current
refers to a segment between two junctions. Choose
the  direction  of  each  current, using  an  arrow. The
direction can be chosen arbitrarily: if the current is
actually in the opposite direction, it will come out
with a minus sign in the solution.

2. Identify  the  unknowns. You  will  need  as  many
independent equations as there are unknowns. You
may write down more equations than this, but you
will find that some of the equations will be redundant
(that is, not be independent in the sense of providing
new  information). You  may  use
for  each
resistor, which  sometimes  will  reduce  the  number
of unknowns.

V = IR

3. Apply  Kirchhoff’s  junction  rule at  one  or  more

junctions.

4. Apply Kirchhoff’s loop rule for one or more loops:
follow each loop in one direction only. Pay careful
attention to subscripts, and to signs:
(a) For  a  resistor, apply  Ohm’s  law; the  potential
difference is negative (a decrease) if your chosen
loop direction is the same as the chosen current
direction  through  that  resistor. The  potential
difference is positive (an increase) if your chosen
loop direction is opposite to the chosen current
direction.

(b) For a battery, the potential difference is positive if
your chosen loop direction is from the negative
terminal toward the positive terminal; the poten-
tial difference is negative if the loop direction is
from the positive terminal toward the negative
terminal.

5. Solve the equations algebraically for the unknowns.
Be careful with signs. At the end, check your answers
by  plugging  them  into  the  original  equations, or
even by using any additional loop or junction rule
equations not used previously.

EXAMPLE 19;8
I
3

and
in the three branches of the circuit in Fig. 19–13 (which is the same as Fig. 19–11).

1 , I
I
Using Kirchhoff’s rules. Calculate the currents
2 ,

APPROACH and SOLUTION
1. Label the currents and their directions. Figure 19–13 uses the labels

1 , I
I
2 ,
I
for the current in the three separate branches. Since (positive) current
and
3
tends to move away from the positive terminal of a battery, we choose  and
I
is not obvious
3
in  advance, so  we  arbitrarily  chose  the  direction  indicated. If  the  current
actually flows in the opposite direction, our answer will have a negative sign.

I
to have the directions shown in Fig. 19–13. The direction of
1

I
2

P R O B L E M   S O L V I N G
Choose current directions arbitrarily

2. Identify the unknowns. We have three unknowns

and therefore
we need three equations, which we get by applying Kirchhoff’s junction and
loop rules.

(I

1 , I

2 , and I

)
3

3. Junction rule: We apply Kirchhoff’s junction rule to the currents at point a,

I
where  enters and  and
1

I
3

I
2
+ I

2 .

I
3

= I
1

leave:

(i)

This same equation holds at point d, so we get no new information by writing
an equation for point d.

30 Ω

h

FIGURE 19–13 Currents can be
calculated using Kirchhoff’s rules.
See Example 19–8.

I1

a

I2

534 CHAPTER 19 DC Circuits

r =
1 Ω

e
=
2
45 V

40 Ω

I3

b

e
=
1
80 V

r =
1 Ω

g

f

d

20 Ω

c

e

4. Loop rule: We apply Kirchhoff’s loop rule to two different closed loops. First
we apply it to the upper loop ahdcba. We start (and end) at point a. From
Vha = – AI
a to h we have a potential decrease
From h to d there is no
1
Vcd = ±45 V.
change, but from d to c the potential increases by 45 V: that is,
From c to a the potential decreases through the two resistances by an amount
Vha + Vcd + Vac = 0,
Vac = – AI
3 .
3
or

B (40 (cid:2) + 1 (cid:2)) = –(41 (cid:2))I

Thus we have

B(30 (cid:2)).

–30I
1

+ 45 - 41I
3

= 0,

(ii)

where we have omitted the units (volts and amps) so we can more easily see
the algebra. For our second loop, we take the outer loop ahdefga. (We could
have chosen the lower loop abcdefga instead.) Again we start at point a, and
B
Vha = – AI
going  to  point  h  we  have
But  when  we
1
take our positive test charge from d to e, it actually is going uphill, against the
current—or  at  least  against  the  assumed direction  of  the  current, which  is
(20 (cid:2))
has  a  positive sign.
what  counts  in  this  calculation. Thus
±I
From  f  to  g  there  is  a  decrease  in  potential  of
Similarly,
2
80 V because we go from the high potential terminal of the battery to the low.
Vgf = –80 V.
Thus
and  the  sum  of  the  potential  changes
around this loop is

Ved = ±I
2

Vdh = 0.

Vag = 0,

(30 (cid:2)).

(1 (cid:2)).

Finally,

Vfe =

Next,

–30I
1

+ (20 + 1)I
2

- 80 = 0.

(iii)

Our major work is done. The rest is algebra.

5. Solve the equations. We have three equations—labeled (i), (ii), and (iii)—

P R O B L E M   S O L V I N G

Be consistent with signs when
applying the loop rule

and three unknowns. From Eq. (iii) we have
80 + 30I
1
21

= 3.8 + 1.4I

I
2

1 .

=

From Eq. (ii) we have

I
3

=

45 - 30I
1
41

= 1.1 - 0.73I

1 .

We substitute Eqs. (iv) and (v) into Eq. (i):

I
1

= I
3

- I
2

= 1.1 - 0.73I
1

- 3.8 - 1.4I

1 .

I
1 ,
We solve for
 3.1I
1
I
1

collecting terms:
= –2.7
= –0.87 A.

(iv)

(v)

P R O B L E M   S O L V I N G

I1 is in the opposite direction
from that assumed in Fig. 19–13

I
The negative sign indicates that the direction of
is actually opposite to that
1
initially assumed and shown in Fig. 19–13. The answer automatically comes
out in amperes because our voltages and resistances were in volts and ohms.
From Eq. (iv) we have

I
2

= 3.8 + 1.4I
1

= 3.8 + 1.4(–0.87) = 2.6 A,

and from Eq. (v)

I
3

= 1.1 - 0.73I
1

= 1.1 - 0.73(–0.87) = 1.7 A.

This completes the solution.

NOTE The unknowns in different situations are not necessarily currents. It might
be that the currents are given and we have to solve for unknown resistance or
voltage. The variables are then different, but the technique is the same.

EXERCISE D Write the Kirchhoff equation for the lower loop abcdefga of Example 19–8
and show, assuming the currents calculated in this Example, that the potentials add to
zero for this lower loop.

SECTION 19–3 Kirchhoff’s Rules

535

R

(a)

1.5 V

a

– +

1.5 V

b

– +

c

(b)

a

20 V

– +

R

b

R

12 V

c

+

–

I

I

12 V
– +

I

(c)

– +
12 V
FIGURE 19–14 Batteries in series,
(a) and (b), and in parallel (c).

FIGURE 19–15 Example 19–9,
a jump start.

19–4 EMFs in Series and in Parallel;

Charging a Battery

Vca

When two or more sources of emf, such as batteries, are arranged in series as in
Fig. 19–14a, the total voltage is the algebraic sum of their respective voltages. On
the other hand, when a 20-V and a 12-V battery are connected oppositely, as shown
in Fig. 19–14b, the net voltage
is 8 V (ignoring voltage drop across internal
resistances). That is, a positive test charge moved from a to b gains in potential
by  20 V, but  when  it  passes  from  b  to  c  it  drops  by  12 V. So  the  net  change  is
20 V - 12 V = 8 V.
You  might  think  that  connecting  batteries  in  reverse  like
this would be wasteful. For most purposes that would be true. But such a reverse
arrangement is precisely how a battery charger works. In Fig. 19–14b, the 20-V
source  is  charging  up  the  12-V  battery. Because  of  its  greater  voltage, the
20-V  source  is  forcing  charge  back  into  the  12-V  battery: electrons  are  being
forced into its negative terminal and removed from its positive terminal.

An  automobile  alternator  keeps  the  car  battery  charged  in  the  same  way.
A voltmeter placed across the terminals of a (12-V) car battery with the engine
running  fairly  fast  can  tell  you  whether  or  not  the  alternator  is  charging  the
battery. If it is, the voltmeter reads 13 or 14 V. If the battery is not being charged,
the voltage will be 12 V, or less if the battery is discharging. Car batteries can be
recharged, but other batteries may not be rechargeable because the chemical reac-
tions in many cannot be reversed. In such cases, the arrangement of Fig. 19–14b
would simply waste energy.

Sources of emf can also be arranged in parallel, Fig. 19–14c, which—if the
emfs are the same—can provide more energy when large currents are needed.
Each of the cells in parallel has to produce only a fraction of the total current, so
the  energy  loss  due  to  internal  resistance  is  less  than  for  a  single  cell; and  the
batteries will go dead less quickly.

Rs = 0.15 (cid:2).

0.020 (cid:2).
0.10 (cid:2).

EXAMPLE 19;9
Jump starting a car. A good car battery is being used to
jump start a car with a weak battery. The good battery has an emf of 12.5 V and
Suppose the weak battery has an emf of 10.1 V and
internal resistance
internal resistance
Each copper jumper cable is 3.0 m long and 0.50 cm
in diameter, and can be attached as shown in Fig. 19–15. Assume the starter
motor can be represented as a resistor
Determine the current
through the starter motor (a) if only the weak battery is connected to it, and (b) if
the good battery is also connected, as shown in Fig. 19–15.
APPROACH We apply Kirchhoff’s rules, but in (b) we will first need to deter-
mine the resistance of the jumper cables using their dimensions and the resistivity
(r = 1.68 * 10–8 (cid:2)(cid:3)m  for copper)
SOLUTION (a) The circuit with only the weak battery and no jumper cables is
0.10 (cid:2) + 0.15 (cid:2) =
simple: an emf of 10.1 V connected to two resistances in series,
0.25 (cid:2).
(b) We  need  to  find  the  resistance  of  the  jumper  cables  that  connect  the
good battery to the weak one. From Eq. 18–3, each has resistance

I = V(cid:2)R = (10.1 V)(cid:2)(0.25 (cid:2)) = 40 A.

as discussed in Section 18–4.

Hence the current is

RJ =

rl
A

=

A1.68 * 10–8 (cid:2)(cid:3)mB(3.0 m)
(p)A0.25 * 10–2 mB2

= 0.0026 (cid:2).

Kirchhoff’s loop rule for the full outside loop gives

12.5 V - I
1
12.5 V - I
1

A2RJ + r
1
(0.025 (cid:2)) - I
3

RS = 0
B - I
3
(0.15 (cid:2)) = 0

(i)

Good battery

C

=
r1
0.020 Ω

e =
12.5 V

Jumper cables

RJ

RJ

Weak battery
I2

A

r =
0.10 Ω

e =
10.1 V

Starter
switch
(closed)

S

Rs = 0.15 Ω

D

I1

B

I3

Starter
motor

since (2RJ + r) = (0.0052 (cid:2) + 0.020 (cid:2)) = 0.025 (cid:2).

536 CHAPTER 19 DC Circuits

The loop rule for the lower loop, including the weak battery and the starter, gives

10.1 V - I
3

(0.15 (cid:2)) - I
2

(0.10 (cid:2)) = 0.

The junction rule at point B gives

I
1

+ I
2

= I

3 .

We have three equations in three unknowns. From Eq. (iii),

I
1

= I
3

- I
2

and we substitute this into Eq. (i):

(ii)

(iii)

12.5 V - AI
3
12.5 V - I
(0.175 (cid:2)) + I
3
2

- I
2

B(0.025 (cid:2)) - I
3

(0.025 (cid:2)) = 0.

(0.15 (cid:2)) = 0,

Combining this last equation with Eq. (ii) gives

12.5 V - I
3

(0.175 (cid:2)) + a

10.1 V - I
3
0.10 (cid:2)

(0.15 (cid:2))

b (0.025 (cid:2)) = 0

or

I
3

=

12.5 V + 2.5 V
(0.175 (cid:2) + 0.0375 (cid:2))

= 71 A,

quite a bit better than in part (a).
The other currents are
is in the oppo-
site direction from what we assumed in Fig. 19–15. The terminal voltage of the
weak 10.1-V battery when being charged is

Note that

= –5 A

= –5 A

= 76 A.

and

I
2

I
2

I
1

FIGURE 19–16 Exercise E.

D

A

S

12.5 V

0.020 Ω

DON'T
TRY
THIS

RJ

RJ

I

0.10 Ω

10.1 V

C

B

Rs

Starter
motor

VBA = 10.1 V - (–5 A)(0.10 (cid:2)) = 10.6 V.
NOTE The  circuit  in  Fig. 19–15, without  the  starter  motor, is  how  a  battery
can be charged. The stronger battery pushes charge back into the weaker battery.

EXERCISE E If the jumper cables of Example 19–9 were mistakenly connected in reverse,
the positive terminal of each battery would be connected to the negative terminal of the
other battery (Fig. 19–16). What would be the current I even before the starter motor
is engaged (the switch S in Fig. 19–16 is open)? Why could this cause the batteries to
explode?

(–)

(±)

Safety when Jump Starting
Before  jump  starting  a  car’s  weak  battery, be  sure  both  batteries  are  12 V  and
check the polarity of both batteries. The following (cautious) procedure applies if
terminal is ground (attached by a cable to the metal car frame
the negative
on both batteries, as is the case
and motor), and the “hot” terminal is positive
±
terminal is usually marked by a red color, often a red
for most modern cars. The
cover. The safest procedure is to first connect the hot
terminal of the weak
battery to the hot terminal of the good battery (using the cable with red clamps).
Spread  apart  the  handles  of  each  clamp  to  squeeze  the  contact  tightly. Then
connect the black cable, first to the ground terminal of the good battery, and the
other end to a clean exposed metal part (i.e., at ground) on the car with the weak
battery. (This last connection should preferably be not too close to the battery, which
gas that could ignite at the spark that may accompany
in rare cases might leak
the final connection.) This is safer than connecting directly to the ground terminal.
When you are ready to start the disabled car, it helps to have the good car running
(to keep its battery fully charged). As soon as the disabled car starts, immediately
detach the cables in the exact reverse order (ground cable first).

(±)

H2

In the photo of Fig. 19–15, the above procedure is not being followed. Note
(±12 V)
, even if dropped by the person, a short circuit

the  safety  error: with  ground  terminals  connected, if  the  red  clamp
touches a metal part
with damaging high electric current can occur (hundreds of amps).

(=  ground)

SECTION 19–4 EMFs in Series and in Parallel; Charging a Battery 537

b

a

C1
+ –
Q1

C2
+ –
Q2

C3
+ –
Q3

V = Vab

FIGURE 19–17 Capacitors in
parallel: Ceq = C
+ C
1

+ C
2

3 .

FIGURE 19–18 Capacitors in series:
+ 1
C
3

+ 1
C
2

1
Ceq

.

C2

C3

B

b

A

+Q

–Q

+Q

–Q

+Q

–Q

= 1
C
1
C1

a

19–5 Circuits Containing Capacitors
in Series and in Parallel
Just as resistors can be placed in series or in parallel in a circuit, so can capacitors
(Chapter 17). We first consider a parallel connection as shown in Fig. 19–17. If
a battery supplies a potential difference V to points a and b, this same potential
exists  across  each  of  the  capacitors. That  is, since  the  left-
difference
hand plates of all the capacitors are connected by conductors, they all reach the
same potential  when connected to the battery; and the right-hand plates each
V,
reach potential
Q
The total charge Q that must leave the battery is then
and

Each capacitor plate acquires a charge given by
= C
3

Va
Vb .
Q

V = Vab

= C
2

= C
1

V,

V.

Q

2

1

3

Q = Q
1

+ Q

+ Q

3

2

= C
1

V + C
2

V + C
3

V.

Let us try to find a single equivalent capacitor that will hold the same charge Q at
It will have a capacitance
the same voltage

V = Vab .

given by

Ceq

Q = Ceq V.

Combining the two previous equations, we have

Ceq V = C
1

V + C
2

V + C
3

V = AC
1

+ C
2

+ C
3

BV

or

Ceq = C
1

+ C
2

+ C

3 .

[parallel] (19;5)

The net effect of connecting capacitors in parallel is thus to increase the capaci-
tance. Connecting capacitors in parallel is essentially increasing the area of the
plates where charge can accumulate (see, for example, Eq. 17–8).

C

3 .

±Q

flows from the battery to one plate of

Capacitors can also be connected in series: that is, end to end as shown in
Fig. 19–18. A charge
flows
The regions A and B between the capacitors were originally
to one plate of
C
neutral, so the net charge there must still be zero. The
1
on the opposite plate. Because region A must have a zero
attracts a charge of
net charge, there is
The same considerations apply to
on the left plate of
the other capacitors, so we see that the charge on each capacitor plate has the same
magnitude Q. A single capacitor that could replace these three in series without
where
affecting the circuit (that is, Q and V the same) would have a capacitance

on the left plate of

–Q
±Q

and

Ceq

–Q

±Q

2 .

1 ,

C

C

Q = Ceq V.

V = Vab

The total voltage V across the three capacitors in series must equal the sum of the
voltages across each capacitor:

V = V
1

+ V
2

+ V
3 .

We also have for each capacitor
V
substitute for
1 ,

V
3 ,

V
2 ,

Q = C
1

V
and
1 ,
and V into the last equation and get

Q = C
2

V
2 ,

Q = C
3

V
3 ,

so we

or

Q
Ceq

1
Ceq

=

Q
C
1

+

Q
C
2

+

Q
C
3

= Q ¢ 1
C
1

+ 1
C
2

+ 1
C
3

≤

= 1
C
1

+ 1
C
2

+ 1
C
3

.

[series] (19;6)

C A U T I O N
Formula for capacitors in
series resembles formula
for resistors in parallel

Ceq
Notice that the equivalent capacitance
is smaller than the smallest contributing
capacitance. Notice also that the forms of the equations for capacitors in series or
in parallel are the reverse of their counterparts for resistance. That is, the formula
for capacitors in series resembles the formula for resistors in parallel.

538 CHAPTER 19 DC Circuits

C
1

EXAMPLE 19;10
Equivalent capacitance. Determine the capacitance of
a single capacitor that will have the same effect as the combination shown in
Fig. 19–19a. Take
APPROACH First we find the equivalent capacitance of
and then consider that capacitance in series with
C
SOLUTION Capacitors
2
lent to a single capacitor having capacitance

are connected in parallel, so they are equiva-

in parallel,

= C
3

= C
2

= C.

and

and

C
3

C
2

C
3

1 .

C

C

23

= C
2

+ C
3

C
This
23
entire circuit,

is in series with
Ceq ,

1 ,
is given by

C

= C + C = 2C.
Fig. 19–19b, so the equivalent capacitance of the

1
Ceq

= 1
C
1

+ 1
C

23

= 1
C

+ 1
2C

= 3
2C

.

C2

C3

C23

C1

b

C1

b

a

a

(a)

V

V

(b)
FIGURE 19–19
Examples 19–10 and 19–11.

Hence the equivalent capacitance of the entire combination is
is smaller than any of the contributing capacitances, C
1

= C
2

C,
Ceq = 2
3
= C.
= C
3

and it

P R O B L E M   S O L V I N G
Remember to take the reciprocal

EXERCISE F Consider  two  identical  capacitors
What  are  the
smallest and largest capacitances that can be obtained by connecting these in series or
5 mF,
parallel combinations? (a)
(b)
10 mF;
5 mF,

0.2 mF,
10 mF,

5 mF;
20 mF.

0.2 mF,

0.2 mF,

10 mF;

20 mF;

20 mF;

(c)

(e)

(d)

(f)

C
1

= C
2

= 10 mF.

C = 3.0 mF

and the battery voltage is

EXAMPLE 19;11
Charge and voltage on capacitors. Determine the charge
on each capacitor in Fig. 19–19a of Example 19–10 and the voltage across each,
assuming
APPROACH We have to work “backward” through Example 19–10. That is, we
find  the  charge  Q that  leaves  the  battery, using  the  equivalent  capacitance.
Then we find the charge on each separate capacitor and the voltage across each.
Each step uses Eq. 17–7,
SOLUTION The  4.0-V  battery  behaves  as  if  it  is  connected  to  a  capacitance
C = 2
Ceq = 2
Therefore the charge Q that leaves the battery,
3
3
by Eq. 17–7, is

(3.0 mF) = 2.0 mF.

V = 4.0 V.

Q = CV.

Q = CV = (2.0 mF)(4.0 V) = 8.0 mC.

= 8.0 mC.
From Fig. 19–19a, this charge arrives at the negative plate of
The charge Q that leaves the positive plate of the battery is split evenly between
C
C
= 1
Q
and
Next, the volt-
2
2
2
C
have to be the same. The voltage across each capacitor is
ages across
2
obtained using

= C
) and is
3

Q = 4.0 mC.

= Q

C
3

so

1 ,

Q

C

1

3

2

(symmetry:
C
and
3
V = Q(cid:2)C.
= Q
(cid:2)C
1
(cid:2)C
2
(cid:2)C
3

V
1
V
2
V
3

= Q

= Q

2

3

1

So
= (8.0 mC)(cid:2)(3.0 mF) = 2.7 V
= (4.0 mC)(cid:2)(3.0 mF) = 1.3 V
= (4.0 mC)(cid:2)(3.0 mF) = 1.3 V.

19–6 RC Circuits—Resistor and
Capacitor in Series

Capacitor Charging
Capacitors and resistors are often found together in a circuit. Such RC circuits are
common in everyday life. They are used to control the speed of a car’s windshield
wipers and the timing of traffic lights; they are used in camera flashes, in heart
pacemakers, and in many other electronic devices. In RC circuits, we are not so
interested in the final “steady state” voltage and charge on the capacitor, but rather
in how these variables change in time.

SECTION 19–6 RC Circuits—Resistor and Capacitor in Series

539

A  simple  RC circuit  is  shown  in  Fig. 19–20a. When  the  switch  S  is  closed,
current immediately begins to flow through the circuit. Electrons will flow out
from the negative terminal of the battery, through the resistor R, and accumulate
on  the  upper  plate  of  the  capacitor. And  electrons  will  flow  into  the  positive
terminal  of  the  battery, leaving  a  positive  charge  on  the  other  plate  of  the
capacitor. As  charge  accumulates  on  the  capacitor, the  potential  difference
across it increases
and the current is reduced until eventually the
There  is  then  no
voltage  across  the  capacitor  equals  the  emf  of  the  battery,
further current flow, and no potential difference across the resistor. The potential
V
difference
across  the  capacitor, which  is  proportional  to  the  charge  on  it
C
= Q(cid:2)C,
V
Eq. 17–7), thus increases in time as shown in Fig. 19–20b. The shape
(
C
of this curve is a type of exponential, and is given by the formula†

= Q(cid:2)C),

(V
C

e.

V
C

= eA1 - e–t(cid:2)RCB,

(19;7a)

where  we  use  the  subscript  C to  remind  us  that
is  the  voltage  across  the
capacitor and is given here as a function of time t. [The constant e, known as the
base for natural logarithms, has the value
Do not confuse this e with
e for the charge on the electron.]

e = 2.718

p

.

V
C

We can write a similar formula for the charge  Q

Q = Q

0 A1 - e–t(cid:2)RCB,

A=  CVC

B

on the capacitor:

(19;7b)

where

Q
0

represents the maximum charge.

The product of the resistance R times the capacitance C, which appears in
t

the exponent, is called the time constant of the circuit:

t = RC.

(19;7c)

] Specifically,

(cid:2)(cid:3)F = (V(cid:2)A)(C(cid:2)V) = C(cid:2)(C(cid:2)s) = s.

The time constant is a measure of how quickly the capacitor becomes charged.
[The  units  of  RC are
it
can  be  shown  that  the  product  RC gives  the  time  required  for  the  capacitor’s
voltage  (and  charge)  to  reach  63% of  the  maximum. This  can  be  checked‡
then
key:
using  any  calculator  with  an
A1 - e–t(cid:2)RCB = A1 - e–1B = (1 - 0.37) = 0.63.
In  a  circuit, for  example, where
A2.0 * 105 (cid:2)BA3.0 * 10–6 FB =
R = 200 k(cid:2)
C = 3.0 mF,
0.60 s.
If the resistance is much smaller, the time constant is much smaller and
the  capacitor  becomes  charged  much  more  quickly. This  makes  sense, because
a lower resistance will retard the flow of charge less. All circuits contain some
resistance (if only in the connecting wires), so a capacitor can never be charged
instantaneously when connected to a battery.

the time constant is

e–1 = 0.37,

t = RC,

so  for

and

ex

VR

across the resistor in Fig. 19–20a? The imposed

Finally, what is the voltage
e,

battery voltage is

so

C A U T I O N
Don’t confuse e for exponential
with e for electron charge

V
C

FIGURE 19–20 After the switch S
closes in the RC circuit shown in (a),
the voltage
across the capacitor
increases with time as shown in (b),
and the current through the resistor
decreases with time as shown in (c).
R

e

–

+

C

(a)

S

VC

e

0.63e

t = 0

t = RC

3RC

t

2RC
Time

(b)

V
R

= e - V
C

= e A1 - 1 + e–t(cid:2)RCB = ee–t(cid:2)RC.

e/R

I

t
n
e
r
r
u
C

Current

0.37e/R

0

RC

(c)

3RC

t

2RC
Time

This  is  called  an  exponential  decay. The  current  I flowing  in  the  circuit  is  that
flowing through the resistor and is also an exponential decay:

I =

V
R
R

=

e
R

e–t(cid:2)RC.

(19;7d)

When the switch of the circuit in Fig. 19–20a is closed, the current is largest at
first because there is no charge on the capacitor to impede it. As charge builds on
the capacitor, the current decreases in time. That is exactly what Eq. 19–7d and
Fig. 19–20c tell us.

†The derivation uses calculus.
e = 2.718
‡More simply, since
tion to the natural logarithm

p
,
then
ln:  ln(e) = 1,

and lnAexB = x.

e–1 = 1(cid:2)e = 1(cid:2)2.718 = 0.37.

Note that e is the inverse opera-

540 CHAPTER 19 DC Circuits

R = 20 k(cid:2),

C = 0.30 mF,

EXAMPLE 19;12
RC circuit, with emf. The capacitance in the circuit of
Fig. 19–20a is
and the battery
the total resistance is
emf is 12 V. Determine (a) the time constant, (b) the maximum charge the
capacitor could acquire, (c) the time it takes for the charge to reach 99% of this
value, and (d) the maximum current.
APPROACH We use Fig. 19–20 and Eqs. 19–7a, b, c, and d.
SOLUTION (a) The  time  constant  is
6.0 * 10–3 s = 6.0 ms.
(b) The  maximum  charge  would  occur  when  no  further  current  flows, so
Q
3.6 mC.
(c) In Eq. 19–7b, we set

RC = A2.0 * 104 (cid:2)BA3.0 * 10–7 FB =

= Ce = A3.0 * 10–7 FB(12 V) =

Q = 0.99Ce:

0

or

0.99Ce = CeA1 - e–t(cid:2)RCB,

e–t(cid:2)RC = 1 - 0.99 = 0.01.

We  take  the  natural  logarithm  of  both  sides  (Appendix A–8), recalling  that
ln ex = x:

t
RC

= –ln(0.01) = 4.6

so

t = 4.6RC = (4.6)(6.0 * 10–3 s) = 28 * 10–3 s

or 28 ms (less than
(d) The current is a maximum at
and there is no charge yet on the capacitor

t = 0

).

1
30 s

(Q = 0):

(the moment when the switch is closed)

Imax =

e
R

=

12 V
2.0 * 104 (cid:2)

= 600 mA.

Capacitor Discharging
The  circuit  just  discussed  involved  the  charging of  a  capacitor  by  a  battery
through a resistance. Now let us look at another situation: a capacitor is already
charged to a voltage
and it is then allowed to discharge through
a resistance R as shown in Fig. 19–21a. In this case there is no battery. When the
switch  S  is  closed, charge  begins  to  flow  through  resistor  R from  one  side  of
the  capacitor  toward  the  other  side, until  the  capacitor  is  fully  discharged.
The  voltage  across  the  capacitor  decreases, as  shown  in  Fig. 19–21b. This
“exponential decay” curve is given by

and charge

V
0

0 ,

Q

V
C

= V
0

e–t(cid:2)RC,

V
where
0
way to zero (to
is

Q = CV (and Q
0

0.37V
) in a time
0
= CV
0

t = RC.
we can write

),

is the initial voltage across the capacitor. The voltage falls 63% of the
Because the charge Q on the capacitor

Q = Q

e–t(cid:2)RC

0

for a discharging capacitor, where

Q

is the initial charge.

0

V
C

= 0

+ V
R

The voltage across the resistor will have the same magnitude as that across
the capacitor at any instant, but the opposite sign, because there is zero applied
vs. time would just
emf:
so
e–t(cid:2)RC.
–I
be Fig. 19–21b upside down. The current
0
and  decreases  exponentially
The  current  has  its  greatest  magnitude  at
in time. (The current has a minus sign because in Fig. 19–21a it flows in the oppo-
site direction as compared to the current in Fig. 19–20a.)

e–t(cid:2)RC.
= –V
0
I = V
R

(cid:2)R = – AV
0
t = 0

(cid:2)RBe–t(cid:2)RC =

A graph of

= –V
C

V
R

V
R

V
C

FIGURE 19–21 For the RC circuit
shown in (a), the voltage
across
the capacitor decreases with time t,
as shown in (b), after the switch S is
The charge on the
closed at
capacitor follows the same curve
since Q r V

t = 0.

C .

R

S
(a)

C

–
V0+

VC

V0

0.37V0

0

t = RC

2RC

3RC

t

Time
(b)

SECTION 19–6 RC Circuits—Resistor and Capacitor in Series

541

is connected to a resistance

EXAMPLE 19;13
A  discharging  RC circuit. If  a  charged  capacitor,
C = 35 mF,
as in Fig. 19–21a, how much
time will elapse until the voltage falls to 10% of its original (maximum) value?
e–t(cid:2)RC.
APPROACH The voltage across the capacitor decreases according to
We set
SOLUTION The time constant for this circuit is given by

), but first we need to calculate

= V
V
C
0
t = RC.

R = 120 (cid:2)

= 0.10V
0

(10% of

V
C

V
0

t = RC = (120 (cid:2))(35 * 10–6 F) = 4.2 * 10–3 s.
t

After a time  the voltage across the capacitor will be
e–t(cid:2)RC.

= V
0

V
C

We  want  to  know  the  time
above equation

t

for  which

V
C

= 0.10V
0 .

We  substitute  into  the

so

0.10V
0

= V
0

e–t(cid:2)RC

e–t(cid:2)RC = 0.10.

The inverse operation to the exponential e is the natural log, ln. Thus

lnAe–t(cid:2)RCB = –

t

RC

= ln 0.10 = –2.3.

Solving for  , we find the elapsed time is

t

t = 2.3(RC) = (2.3)A4.2 * 10–3 sB = 9.7 * 10–3 s = 9.7 ms.

NOTE We  can  find  the  time  for  any  specified  voltage  across  a  capacitor  by
using t = RC lnAV

B.

(cid:2)V
C

0

S

R

C

V0

FIGURE 19–22 Example 19–14.

CONCEPTUAL EXAMPLE 19;14
Bulb  in  RC circuit. In  the  circuit  of
Fig. 19–22, the capacitor is originally uncharged. Describe the behavior of the
lightbulb from the instant switch S is closed until a long time later.

RESPONSE When the switch is first closed, the current in the circuit is high and
the lightbulb burns brightly. As the capacitor charges, the voltage across the capac-
itor  increases, causing  the  current  to  be  reduced, and  the  lightbulb  dims. As
the potential difference across the capacitor approaches the same voltage as the
battery, the current decreases toward zero and the lightbulb goes out.

Medical and Other Applications of RC Circuits
The  charging  and  discharging  in  an  RC circuit  can  be  used  to  produce  voltage
pulses at a regular frequency. The charge on the capacitor increases to a particular
voltage, and then discharges. One way of initiating the discharge of the capacitor
is  by  the  use  of  a  gas-filled  tube  which  has  an  electrical  breakdown  when  the
voltage across it reaches a certain value
After the discharge is finished, the
tube no longer conducts current and the recharging process repeats itself, starting
Figure 19–23 shows a possible circuit, and the sawtooth
at a lower voltage
voltage it produces.

Vœ
0 .

V
0 .

A simple blinking light can be an application of a sawtooth oscillator circuit.
Here the emf is supplied by a battery; the neon bulb flashes on at a rate of perhaps
1 cycle per second. The main component of a “flasher unit” is a moderately large
capacitor.

P H Y S I C S   A P P L I E D
Sawtooth voltage

P H Y S I C S   A P P L I E D
Blinking flashers

FIGURE 19–23 (a) An RC circuit,
coupled with a gas-filled tube as a
switch, can produce (b) a repeating
“sawtooth” voltage.

R

C

+
–

e

Gas-filled
tube

542 CHAPTER 19

(a)

R'

V

V0

V0'

0

(b)

Time

P H Y S I C S   A P P L I E D

Windshield wipers on “intermittent”

P H Y S I C S   A P P L I E D

Heart pacemaker

FIGURE 19–24 Electronic battery-
powered pacemaker can be seen on
the rib cage in this X-ray (color added).

P H Y S I C S   A P P L I E D

Dangers of electricity

The intermittent windshield wipers of a car can also use an RC circuit. The
RC time constant, which can be changed using a multi-positioned switch for dif-
ferent values of R with fixed C, determines the rate at which the wipers come on.

EXERCISE G A typical turn signal flashes perhaps twice per second, so its time constant
is  on  the  order  of  0.5 s. Estimate  the  resistance  in  the  circuit, assuming  a  moderate
capacitor of

C = 1 mF.

An important medical use of an RC circuit is the electronic heart pacemaker,
which can make a stopped heart start beating again by applying an electric stim-
ulus through electrodes attached to the chest. The stimulus can be repeated at the
normal  heartbeat  rate  if  necessary. The  heart  itself  contains  pacemaker cells,
which send out tiny electric pulses at a rate of 60 to 80 per minute. These signals
induce the start of each heartbeat. In some forms of heart disease, the natural
pacemaker fails to function properly, and the heart loses its beat. Such patients
use electronic pacemakers which produce a regular voltage pulse that starts and
controls the frequency of the heartbeat. The electrodes are implanted in or near
the  heart  (Fig. 19–24), and  the  circuit  contains  a  capacitor  and  a  resistor. The
charge on the capacitor increases to a certain point and then discharges a pulse
to the heart. Then it starts charging again. The pulsing rate depends on the time
constant RC.

19–7 Electric Hazards

Excess electric current can overheat wires in buildings and cause fires, as discussed
in Section 18–6. Electric current can also damage the human body or even be fatal.
Electric current through the human body can cause damage in two ways: (1) heating
tissue and causing burns; (2) stimulating nerves and muscles, and we feel a “shock.”
The severity of a shock depends on the magnitude of the current, how long it acts,
and through what part of the body it passes. A current passing through vital organs
such as the heart or brain is especially damaging.

A current of about 1 mA or more can be felt and may cause pain. Currents
above 10 mA cause severe contraction of the muscles, and a person may not be
able to let go of the source of the current (say, a faulty appliance or wire). Death
from  paralysis  of  the  respiratory  system  can  occur. Artificial  respiration  can
sometimes revive a victim. If a current above about 80 to 100 mA passes across
the torso, so that a portion passes through the heart for more than a second or
two, the  heart  muscles  will  begin  to  contract  irregularly  and  blood  will  not  be
properly  pumped. This  condition  is  called  ventricular  fibrillation. If  it  lasts  for
long, death results. Strangely enough, if the current is much larger, on the order
of  1 A, death  by  heart  failure  may  be  less  likely,† but  such  currents  can  cause
serious burns if concentrated through a small area of the body.

It is current that harms, but it is voltage that drives the current. The serious-
ness of an electric shock depends on the current and thus on the applied voltage
and the effective resistance of the body. Living tissue has low resistance because
the fluid of cells contains ions that can conduct quite well. However, the outer
layer of skin, when dry, offers high resistance and is thus protective. The effective
resistance between two points on opposite sides of the body when the skin is dry
103 (cid:2)
is on the order of
or less. A person who is barefoot or wearing thin-soled shoes will be in good contact
with the ground, and touching a 120-V line with a wet hand can result in a current

But when the skin is wet, the resistance may be

106 (cid:2).

104

to

I = 120 V
1000 (cid:2)

= 120 mA.

As we saw, this could be lethal.

†Larger currents apparently bring the entire heart to a standstill. Upon release of the current, the
heart  returns  to  its  normal  rhythm. This  may  not  happen  when  fibrillation  occurs  because, once
started, it can be hard to stop. Fibrillation may also occur as a result of a heart attack or during heart
surgery. A device known as a defibrillator (described in Section 17–9) can apply a brief high current to
the heart, causing complete heart stoppage which is often followed by resumption of normal beating.

SECTION 19–7 Electric Hazards

543

120 V

(a)

I

“Yikes!”

(b)

FIGURE 19–25 You can receive a
shock when the circuit is completed.

C A U T I O N
Keep one hand in your pocket
when other touches electricity

P H Y S I C S   A P P L I E D
Grounding and shocks

You can get a shock by becoming part of a complete circuit. Figure 19–25
shows two ways the circuit might be completed when you accidentally touch a
“hot” electric wire—“hot” meaning a high potential relative to ground such as
120 V  (normal  U.S. household  voltage)  or  240 V  (many  other  countries). The
other wire of building wiring is connected to ground—either by a wire connected
to a buried conductor, or via a metal water pipe into the ground. The current in
Fig. 19–25a  passes  from  the  high-voltage  wire  through  you  to  ground  through
your bare feet, and back along the ground (a fair conductor) to the ground ter-
minal of the source. If you stand on a good insulator—thick rubber-soled shoes
or a dry wood floor—there will be much more resistance in the circuit and much
less current through you. If you stand with bare feet on the ground, or in a bathtub,
there is lethal danger because the resistance is much less and the current greater.
In  a  bathtub  (or  swimming  pool), not  only  are  you  wet, which  reduces  your
resistance, but the water is in contact with the drain pipe (typically metal) that
leads  to  the  ground. It  is  strongly  recommended  that  you  not  touch  anything
electrical when wet or in bare feet. The use of non-metal pipes would be protective.
In Fig. 19–25b, a person touches a faulty “hot” wire with one hand, and the other
hand touches a sink faucet (connected to ground via the pipe or even by water in
a non-metal pipe). The current is particularly dangerous because it passes across
the  chest, through  the  heart  and  lungs. A  useful  rule: if  one  hand  is  touching
something electrical, keep your other hand in your back pocket (don’t use it!),
and wear thick rubber-soled shoes. Also remove metal jewelry, especially rings
(your finger is usually moist under a ring).

You can come into contact with a hot wire by touching a bare wire whose insu-
lation has worn off, or from a bare wire inside an appliance when you’re tinkering
with it. (Always unplug an electrical device before investigating its insides!)† Also,
a wire inside a device may break or lose its insulation and come in contact with the
case. If the case is metal, it will conduct electricity. A person could then suffer a
severe shock merely by touching the case, as shown in Fig. 19–26b. To prevent

(a)

Current

120 V

I

I

(b)

I

(c)

I

120 V

I

Current

120 V

FIGURE 19–26 (a) An electric oven
operating normally with a 2-prong
plug. (b) A short to a metal case
which is ungrounded, causing a shock.
(c) A short to the case which is
grounded by a 3-prong plug; almost
no current goes through the person.

an accident, metal cases are supposed to be connected directly to ground by a
separate  ground  wire. Then  if  a “hot” wire  touches  the  grounded  case, a  short
circuit to ground immediately occurs internally, as shown in Fig. 19–26c, and most
of the current passes through the low-resistance ground wire rather than through
the person. Furthermore, the high current should open a fuse or circuit breaker.
Grounding a metal case is done by a separate ground wire connected to the third
(round) prong of a 3-prong plug. Never cut off the third prong of a plug—it could
save your life. A three-prong plug, and an adapter, are shown in Figs. 19–27a and b.
†Even then you can get a bad shock from a capacitor that hasn’t been discharged until you touch it.

FIGURE 19–27 (a) A 3-prong plug,
and (b) an adapter (white) for old-
fashioned 2-prong outlets—be sure to
screw down the ground tab (green color
in photo).

544 CHAPTER 19 DC Circuits

(a)

(b)

C A U T I O N
Necessity of third (ground) wire

FIGURE 19–28 A polarized
2-prong plug.

C A U T I O N
Black wire may be either
ground or hot. Beware!

FIGURE 19–29 Four wires entering
a typical house. The color codes for
wires are not always as shown
here—be careful!

Black (or red)

120 V

(cid:2)(cid:3)

From
electric
company
(cid:2)(cid:3)

120 V

120 Vrms

White

0 V

120 Vrms

Black

Ground at
electric pole

Hot

120 V
(cid:2)(cid:3)
240 Vrms

Neutral

0 V

Hot

(cid:2)(cid:3)
120 V

0
Green or bare
Ground at
house

Safe Wiring
Why is a third wire needed? The 120 V is carried by the other two wires—one
hot (120 V ac), the other neutral, which is itself grounded. The third “dedicated”
ground wire with the round prong may seem redundant. But it is protection for
two  reasons: (1)  It  protects  against  internal  wiring  that  may  have  been  done
incorrectly or is faulty as discussed above, Fig. 19–26. (2) The neutral wire carries
the full normal current (“return” current from the hot 120 V) and it does have
resistance—so  there  can  be  a  voltage  drop  along  the  neutral  wire, normally
small; but if connections are poor or corroded, or the plug is loose, the resistance
could be large enough that you might feel that voltage if you touched the neutral
wire some distance from its grounding point.

Some electrical devices come with only two wires, and the plug’s two prongs
are of different widths; the plug can be inserted only one way into the outlet so
that the intended neutral (wider prong) in the device is connected to neutral in
the wiring (Fig. 19–28). For example, the screw threads of a lightbulb are meant
to be connected to neutral (and the base contact to hot), to avoid shocks when
changing a bulb in a possibly protruding socket. Devices with 2-prong plugs do
not have their cases grounded; they are supposed to have double electric insulation
(or have a nonmetal case). Take extra care anyway.

The insulation on a wire may be color coded. Hand-held meters (Section 19–8)
may have red (hot) and black (ground) lead wires. But in a U.S. house, the hot
wire is often black (though it may be red), whereas white is neutral and green (or
bare) is the dedicated ground, Fig. 19–29. But beware: these color codes cannot
always be trusted.

[In the U.S., three wires normally enter a house: two hot wires at 120 V each
(which add together to 240 V for appliances or devices that run on 240 V) plus
the  grounded  neutral (carrying  return  current  for  the  two  hot  wires). See
Fig. 19–29. The “dedicated” ground wire (non-current carrying) is a fourth wire
that does not come from the electric company but enters the house from a nearby
heavy  stake  in  the  ground  or  a  buried  metal  pipe. The  two  hot  wires  can  feed
separate 120-V circuits in the house, so each 120-V circuit inside the house has
only three wires, including the dedicated ground.]

Normal circuit breakers (Sections 18–6 and 20–7) protect equipment and build-
ings from overload and fires. They protect humans only in some circumstances, such
as the very high currents that result from a short, if they respond quickly enough.
Ground  fault  circuit  interrupters (GFCI  or  GFI), described  in  Section  21–9, are
designed to protect people from the much lower currents (10 mA to 100 mA) that
are lethal but would not throw a 15-A circuit breaker or blow a 20-A fuse.

Another  danger  is  leakage  current, by  which  we  mean  a  current  along  an
unintended path. Leakage currents are often “capacitively coupled.” For example,
a wire in a lamp forms a capacitor with the metal case; charges moving in one con-
ductor attract or repel charge in the other, so there is a current. Typical electrical
codes limit leakage currents to 1 mA for any device, which is usually harmless.
It could be dangerous, however, to a hospital patient with implanted electrodes,
due  to  the  absence  of  the  protective  skin  layer  and  because  the  current  can
pass directly through the heart. Although 100 mA may be needed to cause heart
fibrillation when entering through the hands and spreading out through the body
(very little of it actually passing through the heart), but as little as 0.02 mA can
cause fibrillation when passing directly to the heart. Thus, a “wired” patient is in
considerable danger from leakage current even from as simple an act as touching
a lamp.

Finally, don’t touch a downed power line (lethal!) or even get near it. A hot
power  line  is  at  thousands  of  volts. A  huge  current  can  flow  along  the  ground
from the point where the high-voltage wire touches the ground. This current is great
enough  that  the  voltage  between  your  two  feet  could  be  large  and  dangerous.
Tip: stand on one foot, or run so only one foot touches the ground at a time.

SECTION 19–7 Electric Hazards

545

(a)

(b)

FIGURE 19–30 (a) An analog
multimeter. (b) An electronic digital
meter measuring voltage at a circuit
breaker.

P H Y S I C S   A P P L I E D
Ammeters use shunt resistor in parallel

FIGURE 19–31 An ammeter is a
galvanometer in parallel with a (shunt)
resistor with low resistance, Rsh .

Ammeter

I

A

I

=

r

G

IG

IR

Rsh

19–8 Ammeters and Voltmeters—Measurement

Affects the Quantity Being Measured

Measurement is a fundamental part of physics, and is not as simple as you might
think. Measuring instruments can not be taken for granted; their results are not
perfect  and  often  need  to  be  interpreted. As  an  illustration  of  measurement
“theory” we examine here how electrical quantities are measured using meters.
We also examine how meters affect the quantity they attempt to measure.

An ammeter measures current, and a voltmeter measures potential difference
or  voltage. Each  can  be  either: (1)  an  analog meter, which  displays  numerical
values by the position of a pointer that can move across a scale (Fig. 19–30a); or
(2) a digital meter, which displays the numerical value in numbers (Fig. 19–30b).
We now examine how analog meters work.

A  galvanometer  whose  sensitivity

An analog ammeter or voltmeter, in which the reading is by a pointer on a scale
(Fig. 19–30a), uses a galvanometer. A galvanometer works on the principle of the
force between a magnetic field and a current-carrying coil of wire; it is straight-
forward to understand and will be discussed in Chapter 20. For now, we only need to
know that the deflection of the needle of a galvanometer is proportional to the current
Im ,
flowing through it. The full-scale current sensitivity of a galvanometer,
is the
50 mA.
electric current needed to make the needle deflect full scale, typically about
can  measure  currents  from
(currents smaller than this would be hard to read on the scale) up to
To  measure  larger  currents, a  resistor  is  placed  in  parallel  with  the
, consists of a
) in parallel with a resistor called the shunt resistor, as shown in
Rsh ,
Rsh
is chosen according
is normally very small—giving an ammeter
and very

about
50 mA.
galvanometer. An analog ammeter, represented by the symbol
galvanometer (
Fig. 19–31. (“Shunt” is a synonym for “in parallel.”) The shunt resistance is
and the resistance of the galvanometer coil is r. The value of
to the full-scale deflection desired;
a very small net resistance—so most of the current passes through
little

Rsh
passes through the galvanometer to deflect the needle.

(f 50 mA)

50 mA

1 mA

Rsh

Im

is

G

A

50 mA

Check if the scale is linear.
50 mA A= IG = 0.000050 AB

Ammeter design. Design an ammeter to read 1.0 A at
and a

EXAMPLE 19;15
full scale using a galvanometer with a full-scale sensitivity of
r = 30 (cid:2).
resistance
APPROACH Only
of  the  1.0-A  current  passes
through the galvanometer to give full-scale deflection. The rest of the current
AI
Fig. 19–31. The
passes through the small shunt resistor,
R
potential  difference  across  the  galvanometer  equals  that  across  the  shunt
resistor (they are in parallel). We apply Ohm’s law to find
I = IG + I
SOLUTION Because
want
ence across the shunt is the same as across the galvanometer, so

flows into the meter, we
The potential differ-

I = 1.0 A
= 0.999950 A.

through the shunt resistor to be

= 0.999950 AB

when
I
R

Rsh .

Rsh ,

I
R

R ,

I
R

Rsh = IG r.

Then

Rsh =

IG r
I
R

=

A5.0 * 10–5 AB(30 (cid:2))
(0.999950 A)

= 1.5 * 10–3 (cid:2),

The shunt resistor must thus have a very low resistance and most of

0.0015 (cid:2).

or
the current passes through it.
ARsh(cid:2)rB

IG = I
R

ARsh(cid:2)rB

and

Because

is  constant, we  see  that  the  scale  is
linear (needle deflection is proportional to
into the
meter  is  half  of  full  scale, 0.50 A, the  current  to  the  galvanometer  will  be
(0.50 A)A1.5 * 10–3 (cid:2)B(cid:2)(30 (cid:2)) = 25 mA,
IG = IR ARsh(cid:2)rB =
which would make
the needle deflect halfway, as it should.

). If the current

I L IR

IG

P H Y S I C S   A P P L I E D
Voltmeters use series resistor

An analog voltmeter (
nected in series, Fig. 19–32.
resistance.

546 CHAPTER 19 DC Circuits

V
Rser

) consists of a galvanometer and a resistor

con-
is usually large, giving a voltmeter a high internal

Rser

Voltmeter design. Using a galvanometer with internal
design a voltmeter
and full-scale current sensitivity of

EXAMPLE 19;16
r = 30 (cid:2)
resistance
that reads from 0 to 15 V. Is the scale linear?
APPROACH When a potential difference of 15 V exists across the terminals of our
to be passing through it so as to give a full-scale deflection.
voltmeter, we want
we have (Fig. 19–32)
SOLUTION From Ohm’s law,

50 mA,

50 mA

V = IR,
15 V = (50 mA)Ar + RserB,

so

Rser = (15 V)(cid:2)(5.0 * 10–5 A) - r = 300 k(cid:2) - 30 (cid:2) L  300 k(cid:2).

r = 30 (cid:2)

is so small compared to the value of

that it doesn’t
Notice that
influence the calculation significantly. The scale will again be linear: if the volt-
age to be measured is 6.0 V, the current passing through the voltmeter will be
(6.0 V)(cid:2)A3.0 * 105 (cid:2)B = 2.0 * 10–5 A,
This  will  produce  two-fifths
of full-scale deflection, as required  (6.0 V(cid:2)15.0 V = 2(cid:2)5).

20 mA.

or

Rser

How to Connect Meters
Suppose you wish to determine the current I in the circuit shown in Fig. 19–33a,
R
1 .
How  exactly  are  ammeters  and  volt-
and  the  voltage  V across  the  resistor
meters connected to the circuit being measured?

Because an ammeter is used to measure the current flowing in the circuit, it
must be inserted directly into the circuit, in series with the other elements, as shown
in Fig. 19–33b. The smaller its internal resistance, the less it affects the circuit.
A voltmeter is connected “externally,” in parallel with the circuit element across
which the voltage is to be measured. It measures the potential difference between
two points. Its two wire leads (connecting wires) are connected to the two points, as
shown in Fig. 19–33c, where the voltage across
is being measured. The larger its
Rser + r,
Fig. 19–32), the less it affects the circuit being measured.
internal resistance (

R

1

Effects of Meter Resistance
It is important to know the sensitivity of a meter, for in many cases the resistance
of the meter can seriously affect your results. Consider the following Example.

1

R

R

2 ,

15-k(cid:2)

50 k(cid:2)
R

EXAMPLE 19;17
Voltage reading vs. true voltage. An electronic circuit has
connected in series, Fig. 19–34a. The battery voltage
two
and
resistors,
is 8.0 V and it has negligible internal resistance. A voltmeter has resistance
on the 5.0-V scale. What voltage does the meter read when connected
of
Fig. 19–34b, and what error is caused by the meter’s finite resistance?
across
1 ,
APPROACH The meter acts as a resistor in parallel with  We use parallel
and series resistor analyses and Ohm’s law to find currents and voltages.
SOLUTION The voltmeter resistance of
Fig. 19–34b. The net resistance
1
Req

50,000 (cid:2)
of these two is

Req
1
15 k(cid:2)

is in parallel with

1
50 k(cid:2)

= 15 k(cid:2),

R
1

1 .

R

=

+

=

13
150 k(cid:2) ;
is in series with

Req = 11.5 k(cid:2)

(not  the  original

30 k(cid:2)

R
2

= 15 k(cid:2),

so the total
). Hence  the  current  from

Req = 11.5 k(cid:2).
so
resistance  is  now
the battery is

I =

This
26.5 k(cid:2)

8.0 V
26.5 k(cid:2)

= 3.0 * 10–4 A = 0.30 mA.

R

1 ,

A3.0 * 10–4 ABA11.5 * 103 (cid:2)B = 3.5 V.

which is the same as that across the voltmeter,
Then the voltage drop across
is
is
[The  voltage  drop  across
A3.0 * 10–4 ABA15 * 103 (cid:2)B = 4.5 V,
for a total of 8.0 V.] If we assume the meter is
so the
accurate, it reads 3.5 V. In the original circuit, without the meter,
voltage across
is half that of the battery, or 4.0 V. Thus the voltmeter, because
of its internal resistance, gives a low reading. It is off by 0.5 V, or more than 10%.
NOTE Often the sensitivity of a voltmeter is specified on its face as, for example,
10,000 (cid:2)(cid:2)V.
Then on a 5.0-V scale, the voltmeter would have a resistance given by
(5.0 V)(10,000 (cid:2)(cid:2)V) = 50,000 (cid:2).
The meter’s resistance depends on the scale used.

= R
2

R
1

R

R

2

1

Voltmeter

V

=

Rser

r

G

FIGURE 19–32 A voltmeter is a
galvanometer in series with a resistor
with high resistance, Rser .

FIGURE 19–33 Measuring current
and voltage.
a

b

c

R1

R2

V

(a)

a

b

c

R2

c

R2

R1

A

V

R1

V

(b)

b

V

(c)

a

P H Y S I C S   A P P L I E D
Correcting for meter resistance

FIGURE 19–34 Example 19–17.

a

b

c

R1

R2

V

(a)

a

V

R1

b

c

R2

V

(b)

SECTION 19–8 547

Example 19–17 illustrates how seriously a meter can affect a circuit and give
a  misleading  reading. If  the  resistance  of  a  voltmeter  is  much  higher  than  the
resistance of the circuit, however, it will have little effect and its readings can be
more  accurate, at  least  to  the  manufactured  precision  of  the  meter, which  for
analog meters is typically 3% to 4% of full-scale deflection. Even an ammeter can
interfere with a circuit, but the effect is minimal if its resistance is much less than
that of the circuit as a whole. For both voltmeters and ammeters, the more sensi-
50,000-(cid:2)(cid:2)V
tive the galvanometer, the less effect it will have on the circuit. [A
1000-(cid:2)(cid:2)V meter.
]
meter is far better than a
Whenever we make a measurement on a circuit, to some degree we affect
that circuit (Example 19–17). This is true for other types of measurement as well:
when we make a measurement on a system, we affect that system in some way.
On  a  temperature  measurement, for  example, the  thermometer  can  exchange
heat with the system, thus altering the temperature it is measuring. It is important
to be able to make needed corrections, as we saw in Example 19–17.

Other Meters
The meters described above are for direct current. A dc meter can be modified
to  measure  ac  (alternating  current, Section  18–7)  with  the  addition  of  diodes
(Chapter 29), which allow current to flow in one direction only. An ac meter can
be calibrated to read rms or peak values.

Rsh

Voltmeters and ammeters can have several series or shunt resistors to offer a
choice of range. Multimeters can measure voltage, current, and resistance. Some-
times a multimeter is called a VOM (Volt-Ohm-Meter or Volt-Ohm-Milliammeter).
An ohmmeter measures  resistance, and  must  contain  a  battery  of  known
ARserB
and to an ammeter which contains a
voltage connected in series to a resistor
(Fig. 19–35). The resistor whose resistance is to be measured completes
shunt
the circuit, and must not be connected in a circuit containing a voltage source.
The  needle  deflection  of  the  meter  is  inversely  proportional  to  the  resistance.
The  scale  calibration  depends  on  the  value  of  its  series  resistor, which  is
changeable in a multimeter. Because an ohmmeter sends a current through the
device whose resistance is to be measured, it should not be used on very delicate
devices that could be damaged by the current.

C A U T I O N

Measurements affect the
quantity being measured

r

G

Rsh

Rser

V

R to be

measured

FIGURE 19–35 An ohmmeter.

Digital Meters
Digital meters (see Fig. 19–30b) are used in the same way as analog meters: they
are inserted directly into the circuit, in series, to measure current (Fig. 19–33b),
and connected “outside,” in parallel with the circuit, to measure voltage (Fig. 19–33c).
The  internal  construction  of  digital  meters  is  very  different  from  analog
meters. First, digital meters do not use a galvanometer, but rather semiconductor
devices  (Chapter  29). The  electronic  circuitry  and  digital  readout  are  more
sensitive  than  a  galvanometer, and  have  less  effect  on  the  circuit  to  be  meas-
ured. When  we  measure  dc  voltages, a  digital  meter’s  resistance  is  very  high,
A107–108 (cid:2)B,
and doesn’t change
commonly on the order of
significantly when different voltage scales are selected. A
digital meter
draws very little current when connected across even a

resistance.

100-M(cid:2)

100 M(cid:2)

10 M(cid:2)

1-M(cid:2)

to

The precision of digital meters is exceptional, often one part in

104 (=  0.01%)
or better. This precision is not the same as accuracy, however. A precise meter of
will not give accurate results if used to measure a voltage
internal resistance
resistor—in which case it is necessary to do a calculation like that in
across a
Example 19–17.

108-(cid:2)

108 (cid:2)

548 CHAPTER 19 DC Circuits

Summary

A device that transforms another type of energy into electrical
energy is called a source of emf. A battery behaves like a source
of  emf  in  series  with  an  internal  resistance. The  emf  is  the
potential  difference  determined  by  the  chemical  reactions  in
the battery and equals the terminal voltage when no current is
drawn. When a current is drawn, the voltage at the battery’s ter-
minals is less than its emf by an amount equal to the potential
decrease Ir across the internal resistance.

When resistances are connected in series (end to end in a
single linear path), the equivalent resistance is the sum of the
individual resistances:

Req = R
1
Req
In  a  series  combination,
resistance.

+ p

(19;3)
+ R
2
is  greater  than  any  component

.

When resistors are connected in parallel, it is the reciprocals

that add up:

1
Req

= 1
R

1

+ 1
R

2

+ p

.

(19;4)

In a parallel connection, the net resistance is less than any of
the individual resistances.

Kirchhoff’s rules are useful in determining the currents and
voltages in circuits. Kirchhoff’s junction rule is based on conser-
vation of electric charge and states that the sum of all currents
entering any junction equals the sum of all currents leaving that
junction. The  second, or  loop  rule, is  based  on  conservation
of energy and states that the algebraic sum of the changes in
potential around any closed path of the circuit must be zero.

When capacitors are connected in parallel, the equivalent

capacitance is the sum of the individual capacitances:

+ p

.

(19;5)

Ceq = C
1

+ C
2

Questions

1. Explain  why  birds  can  sit  on  power  lines  safely, even
though the wires have no insulation around them, whereas
leaning a metal ladder up against a power line is extremely
dangerous.

2. Discuss the advantages and disadvantages of Christmas tree
lights connected in parallel versus those connected in series.
3. If all you have is a 120-V line, would it be possible to light

4. Two  lightbulbs  of  resistance

several 6-V lamps without burning them out? How?
B

and  a
battery are all connected in series. Which bulb is brighter?
What if they are connected in parallel? Explain.

7 R
1

AR
2

and

R
1

R
2

5. Household  outlets  are  often  double  outlets. Are  these

connected in series or parallel? How do you know?

6. With  two  identical  lightbulbs  and  two  identical  batteries,
explain how and why you would arrange the bulbs and bat-
teries in a circuit to get the maximum possible total power
to the lightbulbs. (Ignore internal resistance of batteries.)
7. If two identical resistors are connected in series to a battery,
does the battery have to supply more power or less power
than when only one of the resistors is connected? Explain.
8. You have a single 60-W bulb lit in your room. How does
the overall resistance of your room’s electric circuit change
when you turn on an additional 100-W bulb? Explain.
9. Suppose three identical capacitors are connected to a battery.
Will they store more energy if connected in series or in parallel?

When capacitors are connected in series, it is the recipro-

cals that add up:

1
Ceq

= 1
C
1

+ 1
C
2

+ p

.

(19;6)

When an RC circuit containing a resistance R in series with
a capacitance C is connected to a dc source of emf, the voltage
across the capacitor rises gradually in time characterized by an
(1 - e–t(cid:2)RC)
exponential of the form
, where the time constant
(19;7)
t = RC
is the time it takes for the voltage to reach 63% of its maximum
value.

A capacitor discharging through a resistor is characterized
by the same time constant: in a time
the voltage across
the capacitor drops to 37% of its initial value. The charge on
the capacitor, and the voltage across it, decrease as

t = RC,

e–t(cid:2)RC
.

Electric shocks are caused by current passing through the
body. To  avoid  shocks, the  body  must  not  become  part  of  a
complete circuit by allowing different parts of the body to touch
objects  at  different  potentials. Commonly, shocks  are  caused
by one part of the body touching ground
and another
part touching a nonzero electric potential.

(V = 0)

An ammeter measures current. An analog ammeter consists
of a galvanometer and a parallel shunt resistor that carries most
of the current. An analog voltmeter consists of a galvanometer
and  a  series  resistor. An  ammeter  is  inserted  into the  circuit
whose current is to be measured. A voltmeter is external, being
connected in parallel to the element whose voltage is to be mea-
sured. Digital meters have greater internal resistance and affect
the circuit to be measured less than do analog meters.

10. When applying Kirchhoff’s loop rule (such as in Fig. 19–36),
does the sign (or direction) of a battery’s emf depend on
the direction of current through the battery? What about
the terminal voltage?

r = 1.0 Ω

e = 18 V

r = 2.0 Ω

e = 12 V

R = 6.6 Ω

FIGURE 19–36
Question 10.

11. Different lamps might have batteries connected in either

of the two arrangements
shown  in  Fig. 19–37.
What  would  be  the
advantages  of  each
scheme?

FIGURE 19–37
Question 11.

(a)

+

–
+

–

–

–

+

+

(b)

12. For what use are batteries connected in series? For what
use  are  they  connected  in  parallel? Does  it  matter  if  the
batteries are nearly identical or not in either case?

Questions

549

13. Can the terminal voltage of a battery ever exceed its emf?

Explain.

14. Explain  in  detail  how  you  could  measure  the  internal

resistance of a battery.

15. In an RC circuit, current flows from the battery until the
capacitor  is  completely  charged. Is  the  total  energy  sup-
plied by the battery equal to the total energy stored by the
capacitor? If not, where does the extra energy go?

16. Given  the  circuit  shown  in  Fig. 19–38, use  the  words
“increases,” “decreases,” or “stays the same” to complete
the following statements:
(a) If

increases, the potential difference between A and

R
7

E  __________. Assume no resistance in

~A

and

e.

(b) If

R
7

increases, the potential difference between A and

E __________. Assume

and  have resistance.

~A

e

increases, the voltage drop across
decreases, the current through
decreases, the current

R
1

4

__________.

R
__________.

(c) If
(d) If
(e) If

R
7
R
2
R
2
through

(f) If

R
2
through

(g) If

R
5

R

R

__________.

6

decreases, the current

__________.

3

C

2

R

R
5

drop across

increases, the voltage
__________.
increases, the voltage
R
__________.
4
R
and
increase,
7
__________.

drop across
2 , R
5 ,
e (r = 0)

R

(h) If

(i) If

R4

R5

R6

D

R2

R3

R7

17. Design a circuit in which two different switches of the type

shown in Fig. 19–39 can
be used to operate the
same lightbulb from
opposite  sides  of  a
room.

FIGURE 19–39
Question 17.

Wire

Wire

Wire

18. Why is it more dangerous to turn on an electric appliance
when you are standing outside in bare feet than when you
are inside wearing shoes with thick soles?

19. What is the main difference between an analog voltmeter

and an analog ammeter?

20. What  would  happen  if  you  mistakenly  used  an  ammeter

where you needed to use a voltmeter?

21. Explain why an ideal ammeter would have zero resistance

and an ideal voltmeter infinite resistance.

22. A voltmeter connected across a resistor always reads less
than the actual voltage (i.e., when the meter is not present).
Explain.

23. A small battery-operated flashlight requires a single 1.5-V
battery. The bulb is barely glowing. But when you take the
battery out and check it with a digital voltmeter, it regis-
ters 1.5 V. How would you explain this?

5 ,

and

2 , R

are variable

FIGURE 19–38 Question 16.
R
R
7
resistors (you can change
their resistance), given the
.
symbol

B

R1

A

A

+ –

e

E

MisConceptual Questions
1. In which circuits shown in Fig. 19–40 are resistors connected

3. A

10,000-(cid:2)

in series?

(a)

(c)

(b)

(d)

FIGURE 19–40 MisConceptual Question 1.

2. Which resistors in Fig. 19–41 are connected in parallel?

resistor is placed in series with a

100-(cid:2)

resistor.
resistor is 10 A. If the resistors
100-(cid:2)

10,000-(cid:2)

The current in the
are swapped, how much current flows through the
resistor?
6 10 A.
(a)
(d) Need more information about the circuit.

7 10 A.

(c) 10 A.

(b)

4. Two identical 10-V batteries and two identical

10-(cid:2)
resis-
10-(cid:2)
tors are placed in series as shown in Fig. 19–42. If a
lightbulb  is  connected  with  one  end  connected  between
the  batteries  and  other  end  between  the  resistors, how
much current will flow through the lightbulb?
(a) 0 A.
(b) 1 A.
(c) 2 A.
(d) 4 A.

(a) All three.
R
(b)
2 .
R
(c)
3 .
R
(d)
3 .
(e) None of the above.

and
and
and

R
1
R
2
R
1

FIGURE 19–41
MisConceptual Question 2.

550 CHAPTER 19 DC Circuits

R1

R2

R3

V

10 V

10 Ω

10 Ω

10 Ω

10 V

FIGURE 19–42 MisConceptual Question 4.

5. Which resistor shown in Fig. 19–43 has the greatest current
going through it? Assume that all the resistors are equal.
(a)
(b)
(c)

(d)
(e) All of them the same.

R
.
and
2
and R
4 .

R
R
1
R
3

1 .

5 .

R

R1

R2

R3

R4

R5

FIGURE 19–43
MisConceptual
Question 5.

V

6. Figure 19–44 shows three identical bulbs in a circuit. What
happens to the brightness of bulb A if you replace bulb B
with a short circuit?
(a) Bulb A gets brighter.
(b) Bulb A gets dimmer.
(c) Bulb A’s brightness
does not change.
(d) Bulb A goes out.

A

C

FIGURE 19–44
MisConceptual
Question 6.

B

V

7. When the switch shown in Fig. 19–45 is closed, what will

happen to the voltage across resistor
(a) increase.

(b) decrease.

It will
(c) stay the same.

4?

R

R1

S

R2

R3

R4

V

FIGURE 19–45
MisConceptual
Questions 7 and 8.

8. When the switch shown in Fig. 19–45 is closed, what will

happen to the voltage across resistor
(a) increase.

(b) decrease.

It will
(c) stay the same.

1?

R

9. As a capacitor is being charged in an RC circuit, the current

flowing through the resistor is
(a) increasing.
(b) decreasing.

(c) constant.
(d) zero.
10. For the circuit shown in Fig. 19–46, what happens when the

switch S is closed?
(a) Nothing. Current cannot flow through the capacitor.
(b) The capacitor immediately charges up to the battery emf.
(c) The capacitor eventually charges up to the full battery

emf at a rate determined by R and C.

(d) The capacitor charges up to a fraction of the battery

emf determined by R and C.

(e) The capacitor charges up to a fraction of the battery

emf determined by R only.

S

R

e

C

FIGURE 19–46
MisConceptual Question 10.

Q.

11. The capacitor in the circuit shown in Fig. 19–47 is charged
to an initial value Q. When the switch is closed, it discharges
through the resistor. It takes 2.0 seconds for the charge to
1
drop to
2
(a) 3.0 seconds.
(b) 4.0 seconds.
(c) Between 2.0 and 3.0 seconds.
(d) Between 3.0 and 4.0 seconds.
(e) More than 4.0 seconds.

How long does it take to drop to

Q?

1
4

S

C

FIGURE 19–47
MisConceptual
Question 11.

R

12. A resistor and a capacitor are used in series to control the
timing in the circuit of a heart pacemaker. To design a pace-
maker that can double the heart rate when the patient is
exercising, which statement below is true? The capacitor
(a) needs to discharge faster, so the resistance should be

decreased.

(b) needs to discharge faster, so the resistance should be

increased.

(c) needs to discharge slower, so the resistance should be

decreased.

(d) needs to discharge slower, so the resistance should be

increased.

(e) does not affect the timing, regardless of the resistance.
13. Why is an appliance cord with a three-prong plug safer than

one with two prongs?
(a) The 120 V from the outlet is split among three wires,
so it isn’t as high a voltage as when it is only split
between two wires.

(b) Three prongs fasten more securely to the wall outlet.
(c) The third prong grounds the case, so the case cannot

reach a high voltage.

(d) The third prong acts as a ground wire, so the

electrons have an easier time leaving the appliance. As
a result, fewer electrons build up in the appliance.

(e) The third prong controls the capacitance of the
appliance, so it can’t build up a high voltage.

14. When  capacitors  are  connected  in  series, the  effective
capacitance is __________ the smallest capacitance; when
capacitors are connected in parallel, the effective capaci-
tance is __________ the largest capacitance.
(a) greater than; equal to.
(b) greater than; less than.
(c) less than; greater than.

(d) equal to; less than.
(e) equal to; equal to.

15. If ammeters and voltmeters are not to significantly alter the

quantities they are measuring,
(a) the resistance of an ammeter and a voltmeter should be
much higher than that of the circuit element being
measured.

(b) the resistance of an ammeter should be much lower,
and the resistance of a voltmeter should be much
higher, than those of the circuit being measured.
(c) the resistance of an ammeter should be much higher,
and the resistance of a voltmeter should be much
lower, than those of the circuit being measured.
(d) the resistance of an ammeter and a voltmeter should

be much lower than that of the circuit being
measured.

+ –

(e) None of the above.

MisConceptual Questions

551

For assigned homework and other learning materials, go to the MasteringPhysics website.

Problems

19–1 Emf and Terminal Voltage

1. (I)  Calculate  the  terminal  voltage  for  a  battery  with  an
and an emf of 6.00 V when
resistor,

internal resistance of
the battery is connected in series with (a) a
and (b) a

0.900 (cid:2)

71.0-(cid:2)

resistor.

710-(cid:2)

2. (I) Four 1.50-V cells are connected in series to a

light-
bulb. If the resulting current is 0.45 A, what is the internal
resistance  of  each  cell, assuming  they  are  identical  and
neglecting the resistance of the wires?

12.0-(cid:2)

3. (II) What is the internal resistance of a 12.0-V car battery
whose  terminal  voltage  drops  to  8.8 V  when  the  starter
motor draws 95 A? What is the resistance of the starter?

19–2 Resistors in Series and Parallel
[In these Problems neglect the internal resistance of a battery
unless the Problem refers to it.]
1800-(cid:2)

4. (I) A

650-(cid:2)

and an

resistor are connected in series
1800-(cid:2)

with a 12-V battery. What is the voltage across the
resistor?
5. (I)  Three

lightbulbs  are
connected in series. (a) What is the total resistance of the
circuit? (b) What is the total resistance if all six are wired
in parallel?

lightbulbs  and  three

65-(cid:2)

45-(cid:2)

6. (II) Suppose that you have a

1.20-k(cid:2)
resistor. What is (a) the maximum, and (b) the minimum
resistance you can obtain by combining these?

580-(cid:2),

790-(cid:2),

and a

a

7. (II) How many

10-(cid:2)
to give an equivalent resistance to five
nected in parallel?

resistors must be connected in series
resistors con-

100-(cid:2)

8. (II)  Design  a “voltage  divider” (see  Example  19–3)  that
would provide one-fifth (0.20) of the battery voltage across
2 ,
Fig. 19–6. What is the ratio
R
1

(cid:2)R

R

2?

9. (II) Suppose that you have a 9.0-V battery and wish to apply
1.0-(cid:2)
a voltage of only 3.5 V. Given an unlimited supply of
resistors, how could you connect them to make a “voltage
divider” that produces a 3.5-V output for a 9.0-V input?

1.70-k(cid:2)

10. (II) Three

resistors can be connected together in
four different ways, making combinations of series and/or
parallel circuits. What are these four ways, and what is the
net resistance in each case?

11. (II) A battery with an emf of 12.0 V shows a terminal voltage
of  11.8 V  when  operating  in  a  circuit  with  two  lightbulbs,
each  rated  at  4.0 W  (at  12.0 V), which  are  connected  in
parallel. What is the battery’s internal resistance?

12. (II) Eight identical bulbs are connected in series across a
120-V line. (a) What is the voltage across each bulb? (b) If
the current is 0.45 A, what is the resistance of each bulb,
and what is the power dissipated in each?

13. (II) Eight bulbs are connected in parallel to a 120-V source
by two long leads of total resistance
If 210 mA flows
through each bulb, what is the resistance of each, and what
fraction of the total power is wasted in the leads?

1.4 (cid:2).

14. (II)  A  close  inspection  of  an  electric  circuit  reveals  that
resistor  was  inadvertently  soldered  in  the  place
350-(cid:2)
resistor  is  needed. How  can  this  be  fixed

480-(cid:2)
a
where  a
without removing anything from the existing circuit?

552 CHAPTER 19 DC Circuits

15. (II)  Eight  7.0-W  Christmas  tree  lights  are  connected  in
series  to  each  other  and  to  a  120-V  source. What  is  the
resistance of each bulb?

16. (II) Determine (a) the equivalent resistance of the circuit
shown in Fig. 19–48, (b) the voltage across each resistor, and
(c) the current through
each resistor.

750 Ω

680 Ω

990 Ω

FIGURE 19–48
Problem 16.

12.0 V

17. (II)  A  75-W, 120-V  bulb  is  connected  in  parallel  with  a

25-W, 120-V bulb. What is the net resistance?

175-(cid:2)

18. (II) (a) Determine the equivalent resistance of the “ladder”
resistors shown in Fig. 19–49. In other words,
of equal
what resistance would an ohmmeter read if connected between
points A and B? (b) What is the current through each of the
three resistors on the left if a 50.0-V battery is connected
between points A and B?

R

R

R

A

B

FIGURE 19–49
Problem 18.

R

R

R

R

R

R

19. (II) What is the net resistance of the circuit connected to the

battery in Fig. 19–50?

B

R

C

R

R

R

R

V

FIGURE 19–50
Problems 19 and 20.

R

A

20. (II) Calculate the current through each resistor in Fig. 19–50
What  is

R = 3.25 k(cid:2)
V = 12.0 V.
if  each  resistance
the potential difference between points A and B?

and

21. (III) Two resistors when connected in series to a 120-V line
use one-fourth the power that is used when they are con-
nected  in  parallel. If  one  resistor  is
what  is  the
resistance of the other?

4.8 k(cid:2),

22. (III) Three equal resistors (R) are connected to a battery
as  shown  in  Fig. 19–51. Qualitatively, what  happens  to
(a) the voltage drop across each of these resistors, (b) the
current flow through each, and (c) the terminal voltage of
the battery, when the switch S is opened, after having been
closed for a long time? (d) If the emf of the battery is 9.0 V,
what is its terminal voltage when the switch is closed if the
internal resistance r is
(e) What is
the  terminal  voltage
when  the  switch  is
open?

R = 5.50 (cid:2)?

0.50 (cid:2)

and

R

S

e

r

R

R

FIGURE 19–51
Problem 22.

23. (III)  A

2.5-k(cid:2)

3.7-k(cid:2)

and  a

resistor  are  connected  in
parallel; this  combination  is  connected  in  series  with  a
1.4-k(cid:2)
resistor. If each resistor is rated at 0.5 W (maximum
without  overheating), what  is  the  maximum  voltage  that
can be applied across the whole network?

24. (III) Consider the network of resistors shown in Fig. 19–52.
Answer qualitatively: (a) What happens to the voltage across
each resistor when the switch S is closed? (b) What happens
to  the  current  through  each  when  the  switch  is  closed?
(c) What happens to the power output of the battery when
= 155 (cid:2)
= R
R
the switch is closed? (d) Let
2
and
Determine the current through each resis-
tor before and after closing the switch. Are your qualitative
predictions confirmed?
R1

V = 22.0 V.

= R
4

= R
3

1

29. (II) (a) What is the potential difference between points a
and d in Fig. 19–57 (similar to Fig. 19–13, Example 19–8),
and (b) what is the
terminal  voltage
of each battery?

34 Ω

h

I1

a

I2

FIGURE 19–57
Problem 29.

r =
1 Ω

e
=
2
45 V

47 Ω

I3

b

e
=
1
85 V

r =
1 Ω

g

f

c

e

d

18 Ω

30. (II) Calculate the magnitude and direction of the currents

in each resistor of Fig. 19–58.
5.8 V

V

FIGURE 19–52
Problem 24.

S

R2

120 Ω

R3

R4

FIGURE 19–58
Problem 30.

74 Ω

19–3 Kirchhoff’s Rules
25. (I)  Calculate  the  current  in  the  circuit  of  Fig. 19–53, and

show that the sum of all the
voltage changes around the
circuit is zero.

r = 2.0 Ω

9.0 V

9.5 Ω

31. (II)  Determine  the  magnitudes
and  directions  of  the  currents
R
in Fig. 19–59.
through
2

and

R
1

FIGURE 19–59
Problems 31 and 32.

25 Ω

56 Ω

3.0 V

110 Ω

V1

= 9.0 V

R1

= 22 Ω

R2

= 18 Ω

V3

= 6.0 V

FIGURE 19–53
Problem 25.

14.0 Ω

has an internal resistance

r = 1.4 (cid:2).

32. (II)  Repeat  Problem  31, now  assuming  that  each  battery

26. (II)  Determine  the  terminal  voltage  of  each  battery  in

Fig. 19–54.

r = 2.0 Ω

e = 18 V

r = 1.0 Ω

e = 12 V

R = 4.8 Ω

FIGURE 19–54
Problem 26.

27. (II) For the circuit shown in Fig. 19–55, find the potential

difference between points a
and  b. Each  resistor  has
R = 160 (cid:2)
and  each  bat-
tery is 1.5 V.

1.5 V

R

FIGURE 19–55
Problem 27.

b

R

a

R

R

1.5 V

28. (II)  Determine  the  magnitudes  and  directions  of  the
currents in each resistor shown in Fig. 19–56. The batteries
= 9.0 V
e
e
and the resistors
have emfs of
1
2
= 25 (cid:2), R
R
have  values  of
2
1
= 35 (cid:2).
(a)  Ignore  internal
and
resistance of the batteries. (b) Assume
each  battery  has  internal  resistance
r = 1.0 (cid:2).

= 12.0 V
= 68 (cid:2),

and

R
3

R2

R1

e

1

e
2

R3

FIGURE 19–56
Problem 28.

33. (III) (a) A network of five equal resistors R is connected to
a battery  as shown in Fig. 19–60. Determine the current I
e
that flows out of the
battery. (b) Use the
value  determined
for I to  find  the
Req
single  resistor
is  equivalent
that
to  the  five-resistor
network.

R

R

R

R

R

FIGURE 19–60
Problem 33.

I

e

I
1 ,

I
2 ,

and

I
3

in Fig. 19–61.

34. (III) (a) Determine the currents
Assume the internal resistance
is
of  each  battery
r = 1.0 (cid:2).
(b) What is
the  terminal  voltage
of the 6.0-V battery?

22 Ω

r

I1

12.0 V

I2

r

28 Ω

12.0 V

11 Ω

r

6.0 V

I3

FIGURE 19–61
Problems 34 and 35.

35. (III) What would the current  be in Fig. 19–61 if the

12-(cid:2)

I
1

resistor is shorted out  (resistance

= 0

)? Let r = 1.0 (cid:2).

Problems

553

12 Ω

16 Ω

19–4 Emfs Combined, Battery Charging
36. (II) Suppose two batteries, with unequal emfs of 2.00 V and

3.00 V, are  connected  as  shown
in  Fig. 19–62. If  each  internal
r = 0.350 (cid:2),
resistance  is
and
R = 4.00 (cid:2),
what is the voltage
across the resistor R?

R = 4.00 Ω

e = 2.00 V

FIGURE 19–62
Problem 36.

e = 3.00 V

r

r

37. (II) A battery for a proposed electric car is to have three
hundred 3-V lithium ion cells connected such that the total
voltage across all of the cells is 300 V. Describe a possible
connection  configuration  (using  series  and  parallel  con-
nections) that would meet these battery specifications.

19–5 Capacitors in Series and Parallel
38. (I)  (a)  Six

4.8-mF

capacitors  are  connected  in  parallel.
What is the equivalent capacitance? (b) What is their equiva-
lent capacitance if connected in series?

39. (I) A

3.00-mF

and a

4.00-mF

and this combination is connected in parallel with a
capacitor (see Fig. 19–63). What is the net capacitance?

capacitor are connected in series,
2.00-mF

40. (II)  If  21.0 V  is  applied  across
the whole network of Fig. 19–63,
calculate  (a)  the  voltage  across
each capacitor and (b) the charge
on each capacitor.

=

C1
3.00 mF

=

C2
4.00 mF

FIGURE 19–63
Problems 39 and 40.

=

C3
2.00 mF

V =
21.0 V

41. (II) The capacitance of a portion of a circuit is to be reduced
from 2900 pF to 1200 pF. What capacitance can be added to
the circuit to produce this effect without removing existing
circuit elements? Must any existing connections be broken
to accomplish this?

7.0-mF

42. (II) An electric circuit was accidentally constructed using
value.
capacitor  instead  of  the  required
capacitor, what can a techni-

a
Without removing the
cian add to correct this circuit?

7.0-mF

16-mF

43. (II)  Consider  three  capacitors, of  capacitance  3200 pF,
What  maximum  and  minimum
5800 pF, and
capacitance can you form from these? How do you make
the connection in each case?

0.0100 mF.

44. (II)  Determine  the  equivalent  capacitance  between
points a and b for the combination of capacitors shown in
Fig. 19–64.

45. (II) What is the ratio of the voltage

in Fig. 19–65 to the voltage

V
2

V
1
across capacitor C

across capacitor

2?

C
1

FIGURE 19–65
Problem 45.

10 V

= 1.0 mF

C2

=
C1
1.0 mF

= 1.0 mF

C3

1.4-mF

0.50-mF

and a

46. (II) A

capacitor are connected in series
to  a  9.0-V  battery. Calculate  (a)  the  potential  difference
across each capacitor and (b) the charge on each. (c) Repeat
parts (a) and (b) assuming the two capacitors are in parallel.
47. (II)  A  circuit  contains  a  single  250-pF  capacitor  hooked
across a battery. It is desired to store four times as much
energy  in  a  combination  of  two  capacitors  by  adding  a
single capacitor to this one. How would you hook it up, and
what would its value be?

48. (II) Suppose three parallel-plate capacitors, whose plates
d
have areas
3 ,
are connected in parallel. Show, using only Eq. 17–8, that
Eq. 19–5 is valid.

and separations

1 , d
d

1 , A

and

and

2 ,

2 ,

A

A

3

35.0 mF

49. (II)  Two  capacitors  connected  in  parallel  produce  an
but when connected in
4.8 mF.
What  is

equivalent capacitance of
series  the  equivalent  capacitance  is  only
the individual capacitance of each capacitor?
= 2.0 mF,

= 1.5 mF,
what arrangement of parallel and series
and
connections  with  a  12-V  battery  will  give  the  minimum
2.0-mF
voltage  drop  across  the
capacitor? What  is  the
minimum voltage drop?

50. (III)  Given  three  capacitors,
= 3.0 mF,

C
1

C
2

C
3

C
1

= C
2

51. (III)  In  Fig. 19–66, suppose

= C.
(a) Determine the equivalent capacitance between points a
and  b. (b)  Determine  the  charge
on each capacitor and the potential
difference  across  each  in  terms
of V.

= C
3

= C
4

C2

C1

C3

C4

FIGURE 19–66
Problem 51.

V

a

b

19–6 RC Circuits

52. (I)  Estimate  the  value  of  resistances  needed  to  make  a
variable  timer  for  intermittent  windshield  wipers: one
wipe every 15 s, 8 s, 4 s, 2 s, 1 s. Assume the capacitor used is
See Fig. 19–67.
on the order of

1 mF.

C1

C2

C3

C4

a

FIGURE 19–64
Problem 44.

554 CHAPTER 19 DC Circuits

b

FIGURE 19–67
Problem 52.

53. (II) Electrocardiographs are often connected as shown in
Fig. 19–68. The lead wires to the legs are said to be capac-
itively  coupled. A  time  constant  of  3.0 s  is  typical  and
allows rapid changes in potential to be recorded accurately.
If
what value must R have? [Hint: Consider
each leg as a separate circuit.]

C = 3.0 mF,

To left-leg
electrode

To right-leg
electrode
(ground)

R

R

C

C

Recorder

r
e
ﬁ

i
l
p
m
A

FIGURE 19–68
Problem 53.

V = 0

58. (III) Two resistors and two uncharged capacitors are arranged
as shown in Fig. 19–72. Then a potential difference of 24 V
is applied across the combination as shown. (a) What is the
at the
potential at point a with switch S open? (Let
negative terminal of the source.) (b) What is the potential at
point b with the switch
open? (c)  When  the
switch is closed, what
is the final potential of
point b? (d) How much
charge  flows  through
the switch S after it is
closed?

+
24 V
–

0.48 mF

8.8 Ω

S

b

a

4.4 Ω

0.36 mF

FIGURE 19–72
Problem 58.

To arm electrode

19–8 Ammeters and Voltmeters

54. (II) In Fig. 19–69 (same as Fig. 19–20a), the total resistance
and the battery’s emf is 24.0 V. If the time con-

15.0 k(cid:2),

18.0 ms,

is
calculate
stant is measured to be
(a) the total capacitance of the circuit and
(b) the time it takes for the voltage across
the resistor to reach 16.0 V after the switch
is closed.

FIGURE 19–69
Problem 54.

R

e

C

S

55. (II)  Two

3.8-mF

capacitors, two

resistors, and  a
16.0-V  source  are  connected  in  series. Starting  from  the
uncharged state, how long does it take for the current to
drop from its initial value to 1.50 mA?

2.2-k(cid:2)

and

56. (II) The RC circuit of Fig. 19–70 (same as Fig. 19–21a) has
R = 8.7 k(cid:2)
C = 3.0 mF.
The capacitor is at voltage
at
t = 0,
is
closed. How  long  does  it  take
the  capacitor  to  discharge  to
0.25% of its initial voltage?

V
0
the  switch

–
V0+

when

C

R

FIGURE 19–70
Problem 56.

S

t = 0,

57. (III)  Consider  the  circuit  shown  in  Fig. 19–71, where  all
with  the
resistors  have  the  same  resistance  R. At
t = 0,
capacitor C uncharged, the switch is closed. (a) At
the  three  currents  can  be  determined  by  analyzing  a
simpler, but  equivalent, circuit. Draw  this  simpler  circuit
I
and use it to find the values of
(b) At
2 ,
t = q,
the currents can be determined by analyzing a sim-
pler, equivalent  circuit. Draw  this  simpler  circuit  and
t = q.
I
implement it in finding the values of
1 ,
what  is  the  potential  difference  across  the
(c) At
capacitor?

I
and  at
3

I
and  at
3

t = q,

t = 0.

I
2 ,

I
1 ,

R

I1
I2

R

I3

C

R

+ Q

– Q

e

FIGURE 19–71
Problem 57.

59. (I) (a) An ammeter has a sensitivity of

What
current in the galvanometer produces full-scale deflection?
(b) What is the resistance of a voltmeter on the 250-V scale
if the meter sensitivity is

35,000 (cid:2)(cid:2)V?

35,000 (cid:2)(cid:2)V.

60. (II) An  ammeter  whose  internal  resistance  is

reads
5.25 mA when connected in a circuit containing a battery and
480 (cid:2).
two resistors in series whose values are
What is the actual current when the ammeter is absent?

720 (cid:2)

and

53 (cid:2)

resistor in parallel with a

61. (II) A milliammeter reads 35 mA full scale. It consists of a
0.20-(cid:2)
galvanometer. How
can you change this ammeter to a voltmeter giving a full-scale
reading of 25 V without taking the ammeter apart? What
will be the sensitivity

of your voltmeter?

((cid:2)(cid:2)V)

33-(cid:2)

62. (II) A galvanometer has an internal resistance of

and
deflects full scale for a
current. Describe how to use
this galvanometer to make (a) an ammeter to read currents
up to 25 A, and (b) a voltmeter to give a full-scale deflection
of 250 V.

55-mA

32 (cid:2)

63. (III)  A  battery  with

e = 12.0 V

7.5-k(cid:2)
0.50 (cid:2)

and  internal  resistance
r = 1.0 (cid:2)
is connected to two
resistors in series. An
ammeter of internal resistance
measures the current,
and at the same time a voltmeter with internal resistance
15 k(cid:2)
resis-
tors in the circuit. What do the ammeter and voltmeter read?
What is the % “error” from the current and voltage without
meters?

measures the voltage across one of the

7.5-k(cid:2)

64. (III)  What  internal  resistance  should  the  voltmeter  of
Example 19–17 have to be in error by less than 5%?

65. (III) Two

9.4-k(cid:2)

resistors are placed in series and connected
to a battery. A voltmeter of sensitivity
is on the 3.0-V
scale and reads 1.9 V when placed across either resistor. What
is the emf of the battery? (Ignore its internal resistance.)

1000 (cid:2)(cid:2)V

35 (cid:2),

66. (III) When  the  resistor  R in  Fig. 19–73  is

resistor, the voltmeter

the  high-
resistance voltmeter reads 9.7 V. When R is replaced by a
14.0-(cid:2)
reading drops to 8.1 V.
What are the emf and
internal  resistance  of
the battery?

V

FIGURE 19–73
Problem 66.

r

R

Problems

555

General Problems

67. Suppose that you wish to apply a 0.25-V potential difference
between two points on the human body. The resistance is
about
and you only have a 1.5-V battery. How can
you connect up one or more resistors to produce the desired
voltage?

1800 (cid:2),

68. A three-way lightbulb can produce 50 W, 100 W, or 150 W,
at  120 V. Such  a  bulb  contains  two  filaments  that  can  be
connected to the 120 V individually or in parallel (Fig. 19–74).
(a) Describe how the
connections  to  the
two
filaments  are
made to give each of
the  three  wattages.
(b) What must be the
resistance  of  each
filament?

FIGURE 19–74
Problem 68.

69. What are the values of effective capacitance which can be
obtained  by  connecting  four  identical  capacitors, each
having a capacitance C?

70. Electricity  can  be  a  hazard  in  hospitals, particularly  to
patients who are connected to electrodes, such as an ECG.
Suppose that the motor of a motorized bed shorts out to the
bed frame, and the bed frame’s connection to a ground has
broken (or was not there in the first place). If a nurse touches
the bed and the patient at the same time, the nurse becomes
a conductor and a complete circuit can be made through the
patient to ground through the ECG apparatus. This is shown
schematically in Fig. 19–75. Calculate the current through the
patient.

Bed

Nurse

Patient

(low R)

104 Ω

104 Ω

104 Ω

Motor

240 V

ECG
apparatus
(low R)

FIGURE 19–75 Problem 70.

6.5-mF

71. A heart pacemaker is designed to operate at

72 beats(cid:2)min
capacitor in a simple RC circuit. What value of
using a
resistance should be used if the pacemaker is to fire (capac-
itor discharge) when the voltage reaches 75% of maximum
and then drops to 0 V (72 times a minute)?

556 CHAPTER 19 DC Circuits

950 (cid:2)

72. Suppose that a person’s body resistance is

(moist skin).
(a) What current passes through the body when the person
accidentally is connected to 120 V? (b) If there is an alterna-
tive path to ground whose resistance is
, what then is
the current through the body? (c) If the voltage source can
produce at most 1.5 A, how much current passes through the
person in case (b)?

25 (cid:2)

73. One way a multiple-speed ventilation fan for a car can be
designed  is  to  put  resistors  in  series  with  the  fan  motor.
The  resistors  reduce  the  current  through  the  motor  and
make it run more slowly. Suppose the current in the motor
is 5.0 A when it is connected directly across a 12-V battery.
(a)  What  series  resistor  should  be  used  to  reduce  the
current to 2.0 A for low-speed operation? (b) What power
rating should the resistor have? Assume that the motor’s
resistance is roughly the same at all speeds.

2 ,

3 ,

and

74. A Wheatstone bridge is a type of “bridge circuit” used to
make measurements of resistance. The unknown resistance
R
is placed in the circuit with accurately
to be measured,
x ,
(Fig. 19–76). One of these,
R
1 , R
R
known resistances
3
R
is a variable resistor which is adjusted so that when the
switch is closed momentarily, the ammeter
shows zero
current  flow. The  bridge  is  then  said  to  be  balanced.
(a) Determine
and
3 .
bridge is “balanced”
= 590 (cid:2),
when
R
and
2
R
what
3
is  the  value  of  the
unknown resistance?

R
1
= 972 (cid:2),
= 78.6 (cid:2),

(b) If a Wheatstone

in terms of

I3
A

Ammeter

1 , R

R3

Rx

~A

2 ,

C

B

R

R

R

A

S

x

I1

FIGURE 19–76
Problem 74.
Wheatstone bridge.

R1

R2

D

+

–

75. The internal resistance of a 1.35-V mercury cell is

0.030 (cid:2),
Explain  why
whereas  that  of  a  1.5-V  dry  cell  is
three  mercury  cells  can  more  effectively  power  a  2.5-W
hearing aid that requires 4.0 V than can three dry cells.

0.35 (cid:2).

1
2-W

76. How many

resistors, each of the same resistance, must
3.2-k(cid:2),
be used to produce an equivalent
3.5-W resistor?
What  is  the  resistance  of  each, and  how  must  they  be
connected? Do not exceed

in each resistor.

P = 1

2 W

77. A solar  cell, 3.0 cm  square, has  an  output  of  350 mA  at
0.80 V  when  exposed  to  full  sunlight. A  solar  panel  that
delivers close to 1.3 A of current at an emf of 120 V to an
external load is needed. How many cells will you need to
create the panel? How big a panel will you need, and how
should you connect the cells to one another?

78. The  current  through  the
3.10 mA. What  is  the
terminal  voltage
of
the “unknown” battery?
(There are two answers.
Why?)

Vba

FIGURE 19–77
Problem 78.

4.0-k(cid:2)

resistor  in  Fig. 19–77  is

4.0 kΩ

Vba

3.2 kΩ

a

b

1.0 Ω

8.0 kΩ

12.0 V

R2

VT

R =

V
I

- RA ,

VT = 3.5 V

79. A power supply has a fixed output voltage of 12.0 V, but you
need
output for an experiment. (a) Using the
voltage divider shown in Fig. 19–78, what should
R
R
be if
2
1
VT
be if you
is
connect a load to the 3.5-V
output, assuming the load
has a resistance of 7.0 (cid:2)?

(b) What will the terminal voltage

14.5 (cid:2)?

R1

12.0 V

FIGURE 19–78
Problem 79.

80. A battery produces 40.8 V when 8.40 A is drawn from it,
and  47.3 V  when  2.80 A  is  drawn. What  are  the  emf  and
internal resistance of the battery?
81. In the circuit shown in Fig. 19–79, the

33-(cid:2)

resistor dissi-
68 Ω

pates 0.80 W. What is
the battery voltage?

33 Ω

FIGURE 19–79
Problem 81.

85 Ω

82. For  the  circuit  shown  in  Fig. 19–80, determine  (a)  the
current  through  the  16-V  battery  and  (b)  the  potential
difference between
points  a  and  b,
Va - V

10 kΩ

13 kΩ

b

a

b .

16 V

12 kΩ 18 kΩ

21 V

FIGURE 19–80
Problem 82.

12 V

resistor  in  Fig. 19–81  does
are  both
and

S2

S1

83. The  current  through  the

20-(cid:2)

not  change  whether  the  two  switches
open or both closed.
Use  this  clue  to
determine the value
of
the  unknown
resistance R.

20 Ω

R

50 Ω

FIGURE 19–81
Problem 83.

6.0 V

85. (a) A voltmeter and an ammeter can be connected as shown
in Fig. 19–83a to measure a resistance R. If V is the voltmeter
reading, and I is the ammeter reading, the value of R will not
(as in Ohm’s law) because some current goes
quite be
through the voltmeter. Show that the actual value of R is

V(cid:2)I

1
R

=

I
V

- 1
RV

,

is the voltmeter resistance. Note that

RV
if
where
RV W R.
(b) A  voltmeter  and  an  ammeter  can  also  be
connected as shown in Fig. 19–83b to measure a resistance R.
Show in this case that

R L V(cid:2)I

where V and I are the voltmeter and ammeter readings and
RA
if
RA V R.

is the resistance of the ammeter. Note that

R L V(cid:2)I

V

V

A

R

(a)

A

R

(b)

FIGURE 19–83
Problem 85.

V
0

86. The circuit shown in Fig. 19–84 uses a neon-filled tube as in
Fig. 19–23a. This neon lamp has a threshold voltage
for
conduction, because no current flows until the neon gas in the
tube is ionized by a sufficiently strong electric field. Once the
threshold voltage is exceeded, the lamp has negligible resis-
tance. The capacitor stores electrical energy, which can be
C = 0.150 mF,
released  to  flash  the  lamp. Assume  that
R = 2.35 * 106 (cid:2),
V
(a) Assum-
0
ing the circuit is hooked up to the emf at time
at what
time will the light first flash? (b) If the value of R is increased,
will the time you found in part (a) increase or decrease?
(c) The flashing of the lamp is very brief. Why? (d) Explain
what happens after the lamp
flashes for the first time.

e = 105 V.

= 90.0 V,

t = 0,

and

R

FIGURE 19–84
Problem 86.

e = 105 V

C

Neon
lamp

87. A flashlight bulb rated at 2.0 W and 3.0 V is operated by

S1

10
Ω

S2

a 9.0-V battery. To light the bulb at its
rated voltage and power, a resistor R is
connected in series as shown
in  Fig. 19–85. What  value
should the resistor have?

R

84. (a) What is the equivalent resistance of the circuit shown in
Fig. 19–82? [Hint: Redraw  the  circuit  to  see  series  and
14-(cid:2)
parallel better.] (b) What is the current in the
resis-
resistor? (d) What
tor? (c) What is the current in the
4.5-(cid:2)
is the power dissipation in the

resistor?

12-(cid:2)

FIGURE 19–85
Problem 87.

9.0 V

88. In Fig. 19–86, let

V = 10.0 V

= 25.4 mF.
How  much  energy  is  stored  in  the  capacitor  network
(a)  as  shown, (b)  if  the  capacitors  were  all  in  series, and
(c) if the capacitors were all in parallel?

= C
3

= C
2

and

C
1

12 Ω

22 Ω

14 Ω

6.0 V

C1

C2

C3

FIGURE 19–82
Problem 84.

4.5 Ω

FIGURE 19–86
Problem 88.

a

V

b

General Problems

557

89. A  12.0-V  battery, two  resistors, and  two  capacitors  are
connected  as  shown  in  Fig. 19–87. After  the  circuit  has
been connected for a long time, what is the charge on each
capacitor?

1.3 kΩ

12.0 V

3.3 kΩ

12 mF

48 mF

FIGURE 19–87 Problem 89.

90. Determine the current in each resistor of the circuit shown

in Fig. 19–88.

12.00 V

+
–

5.00 Ω

6.00 Ω

6.00 V

–+

12.00
Ω

+
–

4.00 V

FIGURE 19–88
Problem 90.

–
+
5.00 V

6.80 Ω

0.45-mF

91. How much energy must a 24-V battery expend to charge
a
capacitor  fully  when  they  are
placed (a) in parallel, (b) in series? (c) How much charge
flowed from the battery in each case?

0.20-mF

and  a

92. Two  capacitors,

C
2

C
1

= 2.2 mF

= 1.2 mF,

and

are  con-
nected in parallel to a 24-V source as shown in Fig. 19–89a.
After  they  are  charged  they  are  disconnected  from  the
source and from each other, and then reconnected directly
to  each  other  with
plates of opposite sign
connected
together
(see Fig. 19–89b). Find
the  charge  on  each
capacitor
the
potential  across  each
after  equilibrium
is
established (Fig.19–89c).

(a) Initial configuration.

+Q2
–Q2

+Q1
–Q1

24 V

and

C1

C2

C1

+Q1
–Q1

–Q2
+Q2

C2

0.02-(cid:2)

RS = 0.15 (cid:2).

94. The performance of the starter circuit in a car can be signif-
icantly degraded by a small amount of corrosion on a battery
terminal. Figure  19–91a  depicts  a properly  functioning
internal resistance)
circuit with a battery (12.5-V emf,
attached  via  corrosion-free  cables  to  a  starter  motor  of
resistance
Sometime later, corrosion between
a battery terminal and a starter cable introduces an extra
series resistance of only
RC = 0.10 (cid:2)
into  the
circuit  as  suggested  in
Fig. 19–91b. Let
be
the  power  delivered  to
the starter in the circuit
free  of  corrosion, and
let P be  the  power
delivered  to  the  circuit
with corrosion. Determine
the ratio P(cid:2)P
0 .

e = 12.5 V

r = 0.02 Ω

= 0.15 Ω

RS

P
0

(a)

S

RC

= 0.10 Ω

e = 12.5 V

r = 0.02 Ω

S

FIGURE 19–91
Problem 94.

(b)

RS

= 0.15 Ω

95. The variable capacitance of an old radio tuner consists of four

plates  connected  together  placed
alternately between four other plates,
also connected together (Fig. 19–92).
Each plate is separated from its neigh-
bor by 1.6 mm of air. One set of plates
can move so that the area of overlap
to
of each plate varies from
9.0 cm2.
(a) Are these seven capacitors
connected  in  series  or  in  parallel?
(b) Determine the range of capaci-
tance values.

2.0 cm2

FIGURE 19–92
Problem 95.

96. A 175-pF capacitor is connected in series with an unknown
capacitor, and as a series combination they are connected
to a 25.0-V battery. If the 175-pF capacitor stores 125 pC
of charge on its plates, what is the unknown capacitance?

= 2.4 mF,

97. In the circuit shown in Fig. 19–93,

= 2.0 mF,
C
is  applied  across
3
points a and b. After
is fully charged, the switch is thrown
to the right. What is the final charge and potential differ-
ence on each capacitor?

and  a  voltage
C
1

C
1
Vab = 24 V

= 1.0 mF,

C
2

FIGURE 19–93
Problem 97.

a

b

S

C1

C2
C3

(b) At the instant of reconnection only.

q1
–q1

q2
–q2

FIGURE 19–89
Problem 92.

(c) Later, after charges move.

C
2

93. The  switch  S  in  Fig. 19–90  is
connected downward so that capaci-
becomes fully charged by the
tor
V
battery of voltage
If the switch is
0 .
then connected upward, determine
the charge on each capacitor after
the switching.

C1

C2

S

FIGURE 19–90
Problem 93.

V0

558 CHAPTER 19 DC Circuits

Search and Learn

1. Compare the formulas for resistors and for capacitors when
connected in series and in parallel by filling in the Table below.
Discuss and explain the differences. Consider the role of
voltage V.

Req

Ceq

Series

Parallel

2. Fill in the Table below for a combination of two unequal
and  Assume the electric poten-
resistors of resistance
tial on the low-voltage end of the combination is
volts
and the potential at the high-voltage end of the combination
is

volts. First draw diagrams.

R
1

VA

VB

2 .

R

R¿

4. A potentiometer is a device to precisely measure potential
differences  or  emf, using  a  null technique. In  the  simple
potentiometer  circuit  shown  in  Fig. 19–94,
represents
the total resistance of the resistor from A to B (which could
be a long uniform “slide” wire), whereas R represents the
resistance of only the part from A to the movable contact
at C. When the unknown emf to be measured,
is placed
into the circuit as shown, the movable contact C is moved
until  the  galvanometer  G  gives  a  null  reading  (i.e., zero)
when the switch S is closed. The resistance between A and C
es ,
for  this  situation  we  call
x .
which is known precisely, is inserted into the circuit in place
of
and again the contact C is moved until zero current
flows through the galvanometer when the switch S is closed.
Show
The  resistance  between A  and  C  now  is  called
that the unknown emf
is given by

Next, a  standard  emf,

Working
battery

Rs .

e
x

x ,

R

e

Resistors in Resistors in

Series

Parallel

e
x

≤ es

RV

Property

Equivalent resistance
Current through equivalent
resistance
Voltage across equivalent
resistance
Voltage across the pair of
resistors
Voltage across each resistor

Voltage at a point between
the resistors
Current through each resistor

V
1
V
2

=
=

I
1
I
2

=
=

V
1
V
2

=
=

Not applicable

I
1
I
2

=
=

3. Cardiac  defibrillators  are  discussed  in  Section  17–9.
(a) Choose a value for the resistance so that the
capaci-
tor can be charged to 3000 V in 2.0 seconds. Assume that
this 3000 V is 95% of the full source voltage. (b) The effective
resistance  of  the  human  body  is  given  in  Section 19–7.
If the defibrillator discharges with a time constant of 10 ms,
what is the effective capacitance of the human body?

1.0-mF

A N S W E R S   T O   E X E R C I S E S

and

25 (cid:2).

6 (cid:2)
A:
B: (b).
C: (a) 60-W bulb; (b) 100-W bulb. [Can you explain why?

In (a), recall
41I
3

- 45 + 21I
2

P = I2R.

]
- 80 = 0.

D:
E: 180 A; this high current through the batteries could cause
them to become very hot (and dangerous—possibly
exploding): the power dissipated in the weak battery
would be

P = I2r = (180 A)2(0.10 (cid:2)) = 3200 W

!

= ¢

R
x
Rs
x , Rs ,

R
all

es
and
where
precisely
are
known. The  working
battery  is  assumed  to
be fresh and to give a
constant voltage.

R'

R

A

B

C

S

G

FIGURE 19–94
Potentiometer circuit.
Search and Learn 4.

+

–

ex
or
e
s

A2nB

5. The circuit shown in Fig. 19–95 is a primitive 4-bit digital-
to-analog  converter (DAC). In  this  circuit, to  represent
of a binary number, a “1” has the nth switch
each digit
closed  whereas  zero  (“0”)  has  the  switch  open. For
n = 1,
example, 0010  is  represented  by  closing  switch
while all other switches are open. Show that the voltage V
1.0-(cid:2)
across the
binary numbers 0001, 0010,
0100, and  1001  (which  in
decimal represent 1, 2, 4, 9)
follows  the  pattern  that
you expect for a 4-bit DAC.
(Section 17–10 may help.)

resistor for the

16.0 kΩ

2.0 kΩ

8.0 kΩ

4.0 kΩ

n = 1

n = 0

n = 2

n = 3

16 V

FIGURE 19–95
Search and Learn 5.

1.0 Ω

V

F: (e).
G: L 500 k(cid:2).

Search and Learn 559
