448

11 • Fluid Statics

FIGURE 11.4 Three Gorges Dam in central China. When completed in 2008, this became the world’s largest hydroelectric plant, generating
power equivalent to that generated by 22 average-sized nuclear power plants. The concrete dam is 181 m high and 2.3 km across. The
reservoir made by this dam is 660 km long. Over 1 million people were displaced by the creation of the reservoir. (credit: Le Grand Portage)

11.3 Pressure

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

•  Define pressure.
•  Explain the relationship between pressure and force.
•  Calculate force given pressure and area.

You have no doubt heard the word pressure being used in relation to blood (high or low blood pressure) and in
relation to the weather (high- and low-pressure weather systems). These are only two of many examples of
pressures in fluids. Pressure

 is defined as

11.6

where

 is a force applied to an area

 that is perpendicular to the force.

PRESSURE

Pressure is defined as the force divided by the area perpendicular to the force over which the force is applied, or

11.7

A given force can have a significantly different effect depending on the area over which the force is exerted, as
shown in Figure 11.5. The SI unit for pressure is the pascal, where

In addition to the pascal, there are many other units for pressure that are in common use. In meteorology,
atmospheric pressure is often described in units of millibar (mb), where

11.8

11.9

Pounds per square inch

 is still sometimes used as a measure of tire pressure, and millimeters of

mercury (mm Hg) is still often used in the measurement of blood pressure. Pressure is defined for all states of
matter but is particularly important when discussing fluids.

Access for free at openstax.org

11.3 • Pressure

449

FIGURE 11.5 (a) While the person being poked with the finger might be irritated, the force has little lasting effect. (b) In contrast, the same
force applied to an area the size of the sharp end of a needle is great enough to break the skin.

EXAMPLE  11.2

Calculating Force Exerted by the Air: What Force Does a Pressure Exert?
An astronaut is working outside the International Space Station where the atmospheric pressure is essentially zero.
. What force does the air inside the tank exert on the flat end
The pressure gauge on her air tank reads
of the cylindrical tank, a disk 0.150 m in diameter?

Strategy

We can find the force exerted from the definition of pressure given in

, provided we can find the area

 acted

upon.

Solution

By rearranging the definition of pressure to solve for force, we see that

Here, the pressure

 is given, as is the area of the end of the cylinder

, given by

. Thus,

11.10

11.11

Discussion

Wow! No wonder the tank must be strong. Since we found
directly proportional to the area acted upon as well as the pressure itself.

, we see that the force exerted by a pressure is

The force exerted on the end of the tank is perpendicular to its inside surface. This direction is because the force is
exerted by a static or stationary fluid. We have already seen that fluids cannot withstand shearing (sideways) forces;
they cannot exert shearing forces, either. Fluid pressure has no direction, being a scalar quantity. The forces due to
pressure have well-defined directions: they are always exerted perpendicular to any surface. (See the tire in Figure
11.6, for example.) Finally, note that pressure is exerted on all surfaces. Swimmers, as well as the tire, feel pressure
on all sides. (See Figure 11.7.)
