32-2 I N DUCE D  MAG N ETIC  FI E LDS

943

Checkpoint 1

The figure here shows four closed surfaces with flat top and bottom faces and curved
sides. The table gives the areas A of the faces and the magnitudes B of the uniform
and perpendicular magnetic fields through those faces; the units of A and B are arbi-
trary but consistent. Rank the surfaces according to the magnitudes of the magnetic
flux through their curved sides, greatest first.

Surface

Atop

Btop

Abot

Bbot

a
b
c
d

2
2
2
2

6, outward
1, inward
6, inward
3, outward

4
4
2
3

3, inward
2, inward
8, outward
2, outward

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

32-2 INDUCED MAGNETIC FIELDS

Learning Objectives
After reading this module, you should be able to . . .

32.04 Identify that a changing electric flux induces a magnetic field.
32.05 Apply Maxwell’s law of induction to relate the magnetic
field induced around a closed loop to the rate of change of
electric flux encircled by the loop.

32.06 Draw the field lines for an induced magnetic field inside

a capacitor with parallel circular plates that are being
charged, indicating the orientations of the vectors for the
electric field and the magnetic field.

32.07 For the general situation in which magnetic fields can
be induced, apply the Ampere–Maxwell (combined) law.

Key Ideas
● A changing electric flux induces a magnetic field
Maxwell’s law,

:
.
B

:

, B

! d s: ! m0´0

d#E
dt

(Maxwell’s law of induction),

relates the magnetic field induced along a closed loop to the
changing electric flux #E through the loop.

:
B

! d s: ! m0ienc
● Ampere’s law, -
generated by a current ienc encircled by a closed loop.
Maxwell’s law and Ampere’s law can be written as the single
equation

, gives the magnetic field

:

, B

! d s: ! m0´0

d#E
dt

$ m0ienc

(Ampere – Maxwell law).

Induced Magnetic Fields
In Chapter 30 you saw that a changing magnetic flux induces an electric field, and
we ended up with Faraday’s law of induction in the form

:

, E

! d s: ! ’

d#B
dt

(Faraday’s law of induction).

(32-2)

:
E
#B

Here
is the electric field induced along a closed loop by the changing magnetic
encircled by that loop. Because symmetry is often so powerful in physics,
flux
we should be tempted to ask whether induction can occur in the opposite sense;
that is, can a changing electric flux induce a magnetic field?

The answer is that it can; furthermore, the equation governing the induction
of a magnetic field is almost symmetric with Eq. 32-2. We often call it Maxwell’s

944

CHAPTE R  32 MAXWE LL’S  EQUATIONS;  MAG N ETISM  OF  MATTE R

i

E

2

–

–
1
–

–

–

–

–

–

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

(a)

2

1

i

B

r

R

B

(b)

B

The changing of the
electric field between
the plates creates a
magnetic field.

E

B

:
E

Figure 32-5 (a) A circular parallel-plate
capacitor, shown in side view, is being
charged by a constant current i. (b) A view
from within the capacitor, looking toward
the plate at the right in (a). The electric
field
is uniform, is directed into the page
(toward the plate), and grows in magnitude
as the charge on the capacitor increases.
:
B
The magnetic field
changing electric field is shown at four
points on a circle with a radius r less than
the plate radius R.

induced by this

:
B

in a
Figure 32-6 A uniform magnetic field
circular region. The field, directed into the
page, is increasing in magnitude. The electric
field
field is shown at four points on a circle con-
centric with the circular region. Compare
this situation with that of Fig. 32-5b.

induced by the changing magnetic

:
E

law of induction after James Clerk Maxwell, and we write it as

:

, B

! d s: ! m0´0

d#E
dt

(Maxwell’s law of induction).

(32-3)

:
B

Here
flux #E in the region encircled by that loop.

is the magnetic field induced along a closed loop by the changing electric

Charging a Capacitor. As an example of this sort of induction, we con-
sider the charging of a parallel-plate capacitor with circular plates. (Although
we shall focus on this arrangement, a changing electric flux will always induce
a magnetic field whenever it occurs.) We assume that the charge on our capac-
itor (Fig. 32-5a) is being increased at a steady rate by a constant current i in
the  connecting  wires. Then  the electric  field  magnitude  between  the  plates
must also be increasing at a steady rate.

Figure 32-5b is a view of the right-hand plate of Fig. 32-5a from between
the plates. The electric field is directed into the page. Let us consider a circu-
lar loop through point 1 in Figs. 32-5a and b, a loop that is concentric with the
capacitor plates and has a radius smaller than that of the plates. Because the
electric field through the loop is changing, the electric flux through the loop
must  also  be  changing. According  to  Eq. 32-3, this  changing  electric  flux  in-
duces a magnetic field around the loop.

Experiment  proves  that  a  magnetic  field

is indeed  induced  around  such
a loop, directed  as  shown. This  magnetic  field  has  the  same  magnitude  at  every
point around the loop and thus has circular symmetry about the central axis of the
capacitor plates (the axis extending from one plate center to the other).

:
B

If  we  now  consider  a  larger  loop — say, through  point  2  outside  the  plates
in Figs. 32-5a and b — we find that a magnetic field is induced around that loop
as well. Thus, while  the  electric  field  is  changing, magnetic  fields  are  induced
between the plates, both inside and outside the gap. When the electric field stops
changing, these induced magnetic fields disappear.

Although  Eq. 32-3  is  similar  to  Eq. 32-2, the  equations  differ  in  two  ways.
First, Eq. 32-3 has the two extra symbols m 0 and 20, but they appear only because
we  employ  SI  units. Second, Eq. 32-3  lacks  the  minus  sign  of  Eq. 32-2, mean-
ing that  the  induced  electric  field
have
opposite  directions  when  they  are  produced  in  otherwise  similar  situations. To
:
B
,
see this opposition, examine Fig. 32-6, in which an increasing magnetic field
is counter-
directed into the page, induces an electric field
clockwise, opposite the induced magnetic field

. The induced field
in Fig. 32-5b.

and  the  induced  magnetic  field

:
E
:
B

:
E

:
E

:
B

Ampere–Maxwell Law
Now recall that the left side of Eq. 32-3, the integral of the dot product
around a closed loop, appears in another equation — namely, Ampere’s law:

:
B

! d s:

:

, B

! d s: ! m0ienc

(Ampere’s law),

(32-4)

The induced E direction here is opposite the
induced B direction in the preceding figure.

E

R

E

B

E

B

r

E

32-2 I N DUCE D  MAG N ETIC  FI E LDS

945

where ienc is the current encircled by the closed loop. Thus, our two equations that
specify the magnetic field  produced by means other than a magnetic material
(that is, by a current and by a changing electric field) give the field in exactly the
same form. We can combine the two equations into the single equation

:
B

:

, B

! d s: ! m0´0

d#E
dt

$ m0 ienc

(Ampere – Maxwell law).

(32-5)

When  there  is  a  current  but  no  change  in  electric  flux  (such  as  with  a  wire
carrying a constant current), the first term on the right side of Eq. 32-5 is zero,
and so Eq. 32-5 reduces to Eq. 32-4, Ampere’s law. When there is a change in elec-
tric flux but no current (such as inside or outside the gap of a charging capacitor),
the second term on the right side of Eq. 32-5 is zero, and so Eq. 32-5 reduces to
Eq. 32-3, Maxwell’s law of induction.

Checkpoint 2

The figure shows graphs of the electric field magnitude
E versus time t for four uniform electric fields, all con-
tained within identical circular regions as in Fig. 32-5b.
Rank the fields according to the magnitudes of the
magnetic fields they induce at the edge of the region,
greatest first.

E

a

d

c

b

t

Sample Problem 32.01 Magnetic field induced by changing electric field

A parallel-plate capacitor with circular plates of radius R is
being charged as in Fig. 32-5a.

(a) Derive an expression for the magnetic field at radius r
for the case r 3 R.

KEY IDEAS

A magnetic field can be set up by a current and by induction
due to a changing electric flux; both effects are included in
Eq. 32-5. There  is  no  current  between  the  capacitor  plates
of Fig. 32-5, but  the  electric  flux  there  is  changing. Thus,
Eq. 32-5 reduces to

:
B

Due to the circular symmetry of the plates, we can also as-
sume that  has the same magnitude at every point around
the  loop. Thus, B can  be  taken  outside  the  integral  on  the
right side of the above equation. The integral that remains is
, which simply gives the circumference 2pr of the loop.
- ds
The left side of Eq. 32-6 is then (B)(2pr).

Right  side  of  Eq.  32-6: We  assume  that  the  electric  field
:
E
is uniform between the capacitor plates and directed per-
pendicular to the plates. Then the electric flux #E through
the Amperian loop is EA, where A is the area encircled by
the loop within the electric field. Thus, the right side of Eq.
32-6 is m0´0 d(EA)/dt.

:

, B

! d s: ! m0 ´0

d#E
dt

.

(32-6)

Combining results: Substituting our results for the left and
right sides into Eq. 32-6, we get

We shall separately evaluate the left and right sides of this
equation.

Left side of Eq. 32-6: We choose a circular Amperian loop
with a radius r 3 R as shown in Fig. 32-5b because we want
to evaluate the magnetic field for r 3 R — that is, inside the
:
B
capacitor. The magnetic field  at all points along the loop is
tangent to the loop, as is the path element
and
d s:
are  either  parallel  or  antiparallel  at  each  point  of  the
loop. For  simplicity, assume  they  are  parallel  (the  choice
does not alter our outcome here). Then

. Thus,

d s:

:
B

:

, B

! d s: ! , B ds cos 0+ ! , B ds.

(B)(2pr) ! m0´0

d(EA)
dt

.

Because A is a constant, we write d(EA) as A dE; so we have

(B)(2pr) ! m020 A

dE
dt

.

(32-7)

The  area  A that  is  encircled  by  the Amperian  loop  within
the electric field is the full area pr2 of the loop because the
loop’s radius r is less than (or equal to) the plate radius R.
Substituting pr2 for A in Eq. 32-7 leads to, for r 3 R,

B !

m0´0r
2

dE
dt

.

(Answer)

(32-8)
