Wireless technology is all around us:
radio and television, cell phones,
wi-fi, Bluetooth, and all wireless
communication. These devices work by
electromagnetic waves traveling
through space. Wireless devices are
applications of Marconi’s development
of long-distance transmission of
information a century ago.

In this photo we see the first
humans to land on the Moon. In the
background is a television camera
that sent live moving images through
empty space to Earth where it was
shown live.

We will see in this Chapter that
Maxwell predicted the existence of
EM waves from his famous
equations. Maxwell’s equations
themselves are a magnificent summary
of electromagnetism. We will also
see that EM waves carry energy
and momentum, and that light itself
is an electromagnetic wave.

A P T

E

H

C

R

22

CONTENTS

22–1 Changing Electric Fields
Produce Magnetic Fields;
Maxwell’s Equations

22–2 Production of

Electromagnetic Waves

22–3 Light as an Electromagnetic Wave
and the Electromagnetic Spectrum

22–4 Measuring the Speed of Light
22–5 Energy in EM Waves
22–6 Momentum Transfer and
Radiation Pressure

22–7 Radio and Television;

Wireless Communication

FIGURE 22–1 James Clerk Maxwell.

625

Electromagnetic Waves

CHAPTER-OPENING QUESTION—Guess now!
Which  of  the  following  best  describes  the  difference  between  radio  waves  and
X-rays?

(a) X-rays are radiation whereas radio waves are electromagnetic waves.
(b) Both can be thought of as electromagnetic waves. They differ only in wave-

length and frequency.

(c) X-rays are pure energy. Radio waves are made of fields, not energy.
(d) Radio waves come from electric currents in an antenna. X-rays are not related

to electric charge.

(e) X-rays  are  made  up  of  particles  called  photons  whereas  radio  waves  are

oscillations in space.

T he culmination of electromagnetic theory in the nineteenth century was the

prediction, and the experimental verification, that waves of electromagnetic
fields could travel through space. This achievement opened a whole new
world  of  communication: first  the  wireless  telegraph, then  radio  and  television,
and more  recently  cell  phones, remote-control  devices, wi-fi, and  Bluetooth.
Most important was the spectacular prediction that light is an electromagnetic
wave.

The  theoretical  prediction  of  electromagnetic  waves  was  the  work  of  the
Scottish physicist James Clerk Maxwell (1831–1879; Fig. 22–1), who unified, in one
magnificent theory, all the phenomena of electricity and magnetism.

22–1 Changing Electric Fields Produce
Magnetic Fields; Maxwell’s Equations
The development of electromagnetic theory in the early part of the nineteenth
century by Oersted, Ampère, and others was not actually done in terms of electric
and  magnetic  fields. The  idea  of  the  field  was  introduced  somewhat  later  by
Faraday, and was not generally used until Maxwell showed that all electric and
magnetic phenomena could be described using only four equations involving elec-
tric and magnetic fields. These equations, known as Maxwell’s equations, are the
basic equations for all electromagnetism. They are fundamental in the same sense
that Newton’s three laws of motion and the law of universal gravitation are for
mechanics. In a sense, they are even more fundamental, because they are consistent
with the theory of relativity (Chapter 26), whereas Newton’s laws are not. Because
all of electromagnetism is contained in this set of four equations, Maxwell’s equa-
tions are considered one of the great triumphs of the human intellect.

Although  we  will  not  present  Maxwell’s  equations  in  mathematical  form

since they involve calculus, we will summarize them here in words. They are:

(1) a generalized form of Coulomb’s law that relates electric field to its source,

electric charge ( Gauss’s law, Section 16–12);

(cid:2)

(2) a similar law for the magnetic field, except that magnetic field lines are always
continuous—they do not begin or end (as electric field lines do, on charges);

(3) an electric field is produced by a changing magnetic field (Faraday’s law);
(4) a magnetic field is produced by an electric current (Ampère’s law), or by a

changing electric field.
Law (3) is Faraday’s law (see Chapter 21, especially Section 21–4). The first part
of law (4), that a magnetic field is produced by an electric current, was discovered by
Oersted, and the mathematical relation is given by Ampère’s law (Section 20–8).
But the second part of law (4) is an entirely new aspect predicted by Maxwell:
Maxwell argued that if a changing magnetic field produces an electric field, as
given by Faraday’s law, then the reverse might be true as well: a changing electric
field will produce a magnetic field. This was an hypothesis by Maxwell. It is based
on the idea of symmetry in nature. Indeed, the size of the effect in most cases is so
small that Maxwell recognized it would be difficult to detect it experimentally.

*

I.

©B
||

¢l = m
0

Maxwell’s Fourth Equation (Ampère’s Law Extended)
To back up the idea that a changing electric field might produce a magnetic field,
we use an indirect argument that goes something like this. According to Ampère’s
law (Section 20–8),
That is, divide any closed path you choose into
¢l,
short segments  multiply each segment by the parallel component of the mag-
netic field B at that segment, and then sum all these products over the complete
m
closed  path. That  sum  will  then  equal
times  the  total  current  I that  passes
0
through a surface bounded by the path. When we applied Ampère’s law to the
field around a straight wire (Section 20–8), we imagined the current as passing
through  the  circular  area  enclosed  by  our  circular  loop. That  area  is  the  flat
surface 1 shown in Fig. 22–2. However, we could just as well use the sack-shaped
surface 2 in Fig. 22–2 as the surface for Ampère’s law because the same current I
passes through it.

Surface 2

Closed
path

FIGURE 22–2 Ampère’s law
applied to two different surfaces
bounded by the same closed path.

I

Surface 1

I

626 CHAPTER 22 Electromagnetic Waves

Now consider the closed path for the situation of Fig. 22–3 where a capacitor
is being discharged. Ampère’s law works for surface 1 (current I passes through
surface 1), but it does not work for surface 2 because no current passes through
surface 2. There is a magnetic field around the wire, so the left side of Ampère’s law

I

©B
||

¢l = m
0

I

is not zero around the circular closed path; yet no current flows through sur-
face 2, so the right side is zero for surface 2. We seem to have a contradiction of
Ampère’s  law. There  is  a magnetic  field  present  in  Fig. 22–3, however, only  if
charge is flowing to or away from the capacitor plates. The changing charge on
the  plates  means  that  the  electric  field  between  the  plates  is  changing  in  time.
Maxwell  resolved  the  problem  of  no  current  through  surface  2  in  Fig. 22–3  by
proposing that the changing electric field between the plates is equivalent to an
electric current. He called it a displacement current,
An ordinary current I is
then called a “conduction current,” and Ampère’s law, as generalized by Maxwell,
becomes

ID .

©B
||

AI + IDB.
Ampère’s law will now apply also for surface 2 in Fig. 22–3, where
changing electric field.

¢l = m
0

ID

refers to the

A(cid:2)d,
C = (cid:3)
0
Q = CV = ((cid:3)

Combining Eq. 17–7 for the charge on a capacitor,
and  with  the  magnitudes  in  Eq. 17–4a,
A(cid:2)d)(Ed) = (cid:3)
ID
Then the current
¢Q
¢t

¢£
E
¢t

ID =

0 AE.

= (cid:3)

,

0

0

Q = CV,
V = Ed,
becomes

with Eq. 17–8,
we  can  write

B
E
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–
–
–
–

–
–
–
–

+ +
++
+ +
++
+
+
+
++
+ +
++
+
+

+
+
+

+
+
+

Surface 2

Closed
path

I

Surface 1

FIGURE 22–3 A capacitor
discharging. A conduction current
passes through surface 1, but no
conduction current passes through
the sacklike surface 2. An extra term
is needed in Ampère’s law.

£
E

= EA

where
(Section 21–2). Then, Ampère’s law becomes

is  the  electric  flux, defined  in  analogy  to  magnetic  flux

©B
||

¢l = m
0

I + m
0

(cid:3)

0

¢£
E
¢t

.

(22;1)

Ampère’s law
(general form)

This equation embodies Maxwell’s idea that a magnetic field can be caused not
only by a normal electric current, but also by a changing electric field or changing
electric flux.

22–2 Production of

Electromagnetic Waves
According to Maxwell, a magnetic field will be produced in empty space if there is
a changing electric field. From this, Maxwell derived another startling conclusion.
If a changing magnetic field produces an electric field, that electric field is itself
changing. This changing electric field will, in turn, produce a magnetic field, which
will be changing, and so it too will produce a changing electric field; and so on.
When Maxwell worked with his equations, he found that the net result of these
interacting  changing  fields  was  a wave of  electric  and  magnetic  fields  that  can
propagate (travel) through space! We now examine, in a simplified way, how such
electromagnetic waves can be produced.

Consider two conducting rods that will serve as an “antenna” (Fig. 22–4a).
Suppose these two rods are connected by a switch to the opposite terminals of a
battery. When the switch is closed, the upper rod quickly becomes positively charged
and the lower one negatively charged. Electric field lines are formed as indicated
by the lines in Fig. 22–4b. While the charges are flowing, a current exists whose
direction is indicated by the black arrows. A magnetic field is therefore produced
near the antenna. The magnetic field lines encircle the rod-like antenna and there-
((cid:2))
fore, in Fig. 22–4,
on the left. Now we ask, how far out do these electric and magnetic fields extend?
In the static case, the fields would extend outward indefinitely far. However, when
the switch in Fig. 22–4 is closed, the fields quickly appear nearby, but it takes time
for them to reach distant points. Both electric and magnetic fields store energy,
and this energy cannot be transferred to distant points at infinite speed.

on the right and out of the page

points into the page

(z)

B
B

B
B

FIGURE 22–4 Fields produced by
charge flowing into conductors. It
B
takes time for the  and
E
travel outward to distant points. The
fields are shown to the right of the
antenna, but they move out in all
directions, symmetrically about the
(vertical) antenna.

fields to

S

+
–

(a)

+
–

I

I

B
B

is out

(b)

+

+
+

–
–

–

B
E

B
E

B
E

B

B

is in

SECTION 22–2 Production of Electromagnetic Waves

627

+

–

–

+

I

I

I

I

+
+
+

–
–
–
(a)

(b)

FIGURE 22–5 Sequence showing
electric and magnetic fields that
spread outward from oscillating
charges on two conductors (the
antenna) connected to an ac source
(see the text).

±

–

(z)

and

or out of

Now we look at the situation of Fig. 22–5, where our antenna is connected to
an ac generator. In Fig. 22–5a, the connection has just been completed. Charge
starts  building  up, and  fields  form  just  as  in  Fig. 22–4b. The
signs  in
Fig. 22–5a indicate the net charge on each rod at a given instant. The black arrows
indicate the direction of the current. The electric field is represented by red lines
in the plane of the page; and the magnetic field, according to the right-hand rule,
the page in blue. In Fig. 22–5b, the voltage of the ac
is into
generator has reversed in direction; the current is reversed and the new magnetic
field is in the opposite direction. Because the new fields have changed direction,
the old lines fold back to connect up to some of the new lines and form closed
loops as shown.† The old fields, however, don’t suddenly disappear; they are on
their way to distant points. Indeed, because a changing magnetic field produces
an  electric  field, and  a changing  electric  field  produces  a magnetic  field, this
combination  of  changing  electric  and  magnetic  fields  moving  outward  is  self-
supporting, no longer depending on the antenna charges.

((cid:2))

The  fields  not  far  from  the  antenna, referred  to  as  the  near  field, become
quite complicated, but we are not so interested in them. We are mainly interested
in the fields far from the antenna (they are generally what we detect), which we
refer  to  as  the  radiation  field. The  electric  field  lines  form  loops, as  shown  in
Fig. 22–6a, and continue moving outward. The magnetic field lines also form closed
loops, but are not shown because they are perpendicular to the page. Although the
lines are shown only on the right of the source, fields also travel in other directions.
The  field  strengths  are  greatest  in  directions  perpendicular  to  the  oscillating
charges; and they drop to zero along the direction of oscillation—above and below
the antenna in Fig. 22–6a.

FIGURE 22–6 (a) The radiation fields (far from the antenna)
produced by a sinusoidal signal on the antenna. The red
closed loops represent electric field lines. The magnetic field
lines, perpendicular to the page and represented by blue
and
the wave fronts (field lines) are essentially flat over a fairly
large area, and are referred to as plane waves.

also form closed loops. (b) Very far from the antenna,

(cid:2),

z

Antenna

(a)

Direction
of
wave travel

(b)

B
E

B
B

B
E

1(cid:2)r.

The magnitudes of both  and

in the radiation field are found to decrease
(Compare this to the static electric field given by Coulomb’s
with distance as
law where  decreases as
) The energy carried by the electromagnetic wave
is  proportional  (as  for  any  wave, Chapter  11)  to  the  square  of  the  amplitude,
E2
B2,
as will be discussed further in Section 22–7, so the intensity of the wave
decreases  as
Thus  the  energy  carried  by  EM  waves  follows  the  inverse
square law just as for sound waves (Eqs. 11–16).

1(cid:2)r2.

1(cid:2)r2.

or

is into the page at some points and out of the page at others;

Several things about the radiation field can be noted from Fig. 22–6. First, the
electric and magnetic fields at any point are perpendicular to each other, and to the
direction of wave travel. Second, we can see that the fields alternate in direction
B
B
(
points up at
some points and down at others). Thus, the field strengths vary from a maximum
in one direction, to zero, to a maximum in the other direction. The electric and
magnetic fields are “in phase”: that is, they each are zero at the same points and
reach their maxima at the same points in space. Finally, very far from the antenna
(Fig. 22–6b)  the  field  lines  are  quite  flat  over  a reasonably  large  area, and  the
waves are referred to as plane waves.

B
E

†We are considering waves traveling through empty space. There are no charges for lines of
or stop on, so they form closed loops. Magnetic field lines always form closed loops.

B
E

to start

628 CHAPTER 22 Electromagnetic Waves

B
E

y

x

z

B
B

If the source voltage varies sinusoidally, then the electric and magnetic field
strengths in the radiation field will also vary sinusoidally. The sinusoidal character
of the waves is shown in Fig. 22–7, which displays the field directions and magni-
tudes plotted as a function of position along the direction of wave travel. Notice
that  and  are perpendicular to each other and to the direction of wave travel.

B
B
We call these waves electromagnetic (EM) waves. They are transverse waves
because the amplitude is perpendicular to the direction of wave travel. However,
EM  waves  are  always  waves  of  fields, not  of  matter  (like  waves  on  water  or  a
rope). Because they are fields, EM waves can propagate in empty space.

B
E

As we have seen, EM waves are produced by electric charges that are oscil-
lating, and hence are undergoing acceleration. In fact, we can say in general that

accelerating electric charges give rise to electromagnetic waves.

Maxwell derived a formula for the speed of EM waves:
E
B

v = c =

,

(22;2)

B
B

Direction
of motion
of wave

B
E

FIGURE 22–7 Electric and
magnetic field strengths in an
electromagnetic wave.
at right angles to each other. The
entire pattern moves in a direction
B
perpendicular to both  and B
.

B
and  are
B

B
E

B
E

where c is the special symbol for the speed of electromagnetic waves in empty
space, and E and B are the magnitudes of electric and magnetic fields at the same
point in space. More specifically, it was also shown that

c =

1
2(cid:3)

0

.

m
0

[speed of EM waves]

(22;3)

When Maxwell put in the values for

(cid:3)

0

and

m

0 ,

he found

c =

1
2(cid:3)

0

m
0

=

1
3A8.85 * 10–12 C2(cid:2)N(cid:4)m2BA4p * 10–7 N(cid:4)s2(cid:2)C2B

= 3.00 * 108 m(cid:2)s,

which is exactly equal to the measured speed of light in vacuum (Section 22–4).

EXERCISE A At a particular instant in time, a wave has its electric field pointing north
and its magnetic field pointing up. In which direction is the wave traveling? (a) South,
(b) west, (c) east, (d) down, (e) not enough information. [See Fig. 22–7.]

22–3 Light as an Electromagnetic Wave
and the Electromagnetic Spectrum
Maxwell’s prediction that EM waves should exist was startling. Equally remarkable
3.00 * 108 m(cid:2)s,
was  the  speed  at  which  EM  waves  were  predicted  to  travel—
the same as the measured speed of light.

Light had been shown some 60 years before Maxwell’s work to behave like
a wave (we’ll discuss this in Chapter 24). But nobody knew what kind of wave it
was. What is it that is oscillating in a light wave? Maxwell, on the basis of the
calculated speed of EM waves, argued that light must be an electromagnetic wave.
This  idea  soon  came  to  be  generally  accepted  by  scientists, but  not  fully  until
after EM waves were experimentally detected. EM waves were first generated
and detected experimentally by Heinrich Hertz (1857–1894) in 1887, eight years
after  Maxwell’s  death. Hertz  used  a spark-gap  apparatus  in  which  charge  was
made to rush back and forth for a short time, generating waves whose frequency
was about
He detected them some distance away using a loop of wire in
which  an  emf  was  induced  when  a changing  magnetic  field  passed  through.

109 Hz.

SECTION 22–3 629

3.00 * 108 m(cid:2)s,
These  waves  were  later  shown  to  travel  at  the  speed  of  light,
and  to  exhibit  all  the  characteristics  of  light  such  as  reflection, refraction, and
interference. The only difference was that they were not visible. Hertz’s experiment
was a strong confirmation of Maxwell’s theory.

The wavelengths of visible light were measured in the first decade of the nine-
teenth century, long before anyone imagined that light was an electromagnetic
7.5 * 10–7 m,
wave. The wavelengths were found to lie between
The  frequencies  of  visible  light  can  be
or
found using Eq. 11–12, which we rewrite here:

A1 nm = 10–9 mB.

4.0 * 10–7 m

400 nm

750 nm

and

to

c = lf,

(22;4)

l

3.00 * 108 m(cid:2)s;

where f and  are the frequency and wavelength, respectively, of the wave. Here,
c is the speed of light,
it gets the special symbol c because of its
universality  for  all  EM  waves  in  free  space. Equation  22–4  tells  us  that  the
frequencies of visible light are between
(Recall
1 Hz = 1 cycle per second = 1 s–1.
that
But  visible  light  is  only  one  kind  of  EM  wave. As  we  have  seen, Hertz
produced EM waves of much lower frequency, about
These are now called
radio waves, because frequencies in this range are used to transmit radio and TV
signals. Electromagnetic  waves, or  EM  radiation  as  we  sometimes  call  it, have
been produced  or  detected  over  a wide  range  of  frequencies. They  are  usually
categorized as shown in Fig. 22–8, which is known as the electromagnetic spectrum.

4.0 * 1014 Hz
)

7.5 * 1014 Hz.

109 Hz.

and

Wavelength (m)

3 × 104 m

3 m

3 × 10−4 m

3 × 10−8 m

3 × 10−12 m

Radio waves

Microwaves
(e.g., radar)

FM TV

Ch7&up

Cellular
phones

Satellite
TV

TV
Ch2-6

60 Hz
(ac current)

102

104

AM
radio

106

Infrared

Ultraviolet

Gamma rays

t
h
g
i
l

e
l
b
i
s
i
V

X-rays

108

1010

1012

1014

1016

1018

1020

Frequency (Hz)

l = 7.5 × 10−7 m

4.0 × 10−7 m

FIGURE 22–8
Electromagnetic spectrum.

f = 4 × 1014 Hz

Visible light

7.5 × 1014 Hz

Radio waves and microwaves can be produced in the laboratory using elec-
tronic equipment (Fig. 22–5). Higher-frequency waves are very difficult to produce
electronically. These and other types of EM waves are produced in natural processes,
as emission from atoms, molecules, and nuclei (more on this later). EM waves can be
produced  by  the  acceleration  of  electrons  or  other  charged  particles, such  as
electrons  in  the  antenna  of  Fig. 22–5. X-rays  have  very  short  wavelengths
(and very high frequencies), and they are produced (Chapters 25 and 28) when
fast-moving electrons are rapidly decelerated upon striking a metal target. Even
the  visible  light  emitted  by  an  ordinary  incandescent  bulb  is  due  to  electrons
undergoing acceleration within the hot filament.

EXERCISE B Return to the Chapter-Opening Question, page 625, and answer it again
now. Try to explain why you may have answered differently the first time.

We will meet various types of EM waves later. However, it is worth mentioning
here that infrared (IR) radiation (EM waves whose frequency is just less than that
of visible light) is mainly responsible for the heating effect of the Sun. The Sun
emits not only visible light but substantial amounts of IR and UV (ultraviolet) as
well. The molecules of our skin tend to “resonate” at infrared frequencies, so it is
these that are preferentially absorbed and thus warm us. We humans experience
EM waves differently depending on their wavelengths: Our eyes detect wavelengths
(visible light), whereas our skin detects
between about
longer wavelengths (IR). Many EM wavelengths we don’t detect directly at all.

7.5 * 10–7 m

4 * 10–7 m

and

630 CHAPTER 22

3 * 108 m(cid:2)s.
Light  and  other  electromagnetic  waves  travel  at  a speed  of
300 m(cid:2)s
Compare this to sound, which travels (see Chapter 12) at a speed of about
100 km(cid:2)h,
(
in air, a million times slower; or to typical freeway speeds of a car,
or
), 10 million times slower than light. EM waves differ from sound waves
in  another  big  way: sound  waves  travel  in  a medium  such  as  air, and  involve
motion of air molecules; EM waves do not involve any material—only fields, and
they can travel in empty space.

60 mi(cid:2)h

30 m(cid:2)s

EXAMPLE 22;1
Wavelengths of EM waves. Calculate the wavelength
(a) of a 60-Hz EM wave, (b) of a 93.3-MHz FM radio wave, and (c) of a beam
of visible red light from a laser at frequency
APPROACH All  of  these  waves  are  electromagnetic  waves, so  their  speed  is
c = 3.00 * 108 m(cid:2)s.
SOLUTION (a)
l =

4.74 * 1014 Hz.

in Eq. 22–4:

We solve for

l = c(cid:2)f.

l

= 5.0 * 106 m,

c
f

= 3.00 * 108 m(cid:2)s
60 s–1

or 5000 km. 60 Hz is the frequency of ac current in the United States, and, as we
see here, one wavelength stretches all the way across the continental USA.
(b)

l = 3.00 * 108 m(cid:2)s
93.3 * 106 s–1

= 3.22 m.

The length of an FM radio antenna is often about half this
(c)

= 6.33 * 10–7 m (=  633 nm).

l = 3.00 * 108 m(cid:2)s
4.74 * 1014 s–1

A1
2

lB,

or

1 1
2

 m.

EXERCISE C What  are  the  frequencies  of  (a)  an  80-m-wavelength  radio  wave, and
(b) an X-ray of wavelength 5.5 * 10–11 m?

EXAMPLE 22;2 ESTIMATE
Cell phone antenna. The antenna of a cell
1
phone is often  wavelength long. A particular cell phone has an 8.5-cm-long
4
straight rod for its antenna. Estimate the operating frequency of this phone.
APPROACH The basic equation relating wave speed, wavelength, and frequency
is
SOLUTION The antenna is
f = c(cid:2)l = A3.0 * 108 m(cid:2)sB(cid:2)(0.34 m) = 8.8 * 108 Hz = 880 MHz.
NOTE Radio antennas are not always straight conductors. The conductor may
be a round loop to save space. See Fig. 22–18b.

the wavelength  equals four times the antenna’s length.

l = 4(8.5 cm) = 34 cm = 0.34 m.

c = lf;

long, so

Then

l

l

1
4

EXERCISE D How  long  should  a
165 MHz?

1

4-l

antenna  be  for  an  aircraft  radio  operating  at

Electromagnetic waves can travel along transmission lines as well as in empty
space. When a source of emf is connected to a transmission line—be it two parallel
wires or a coaxial cable (Fig. 22–9)—the electric field within the wire is not set up
immediately at all points along the wires. This is based on the same argument we
used in Section 22–2 with reference to Fig. 22–5. Indeed, it can be shown that if
the wires are separated by empty space or air, the electrical signal travels along the
wires at the speed
For example, when you flip a light switch,
the light actually goes on a tiny fraction of a second later. If the wires are in a medium
(cid:3)
(Sections 17–8 and
whose electric permittivity is  and magnetic permeability is
20–12, respectively), the speed is not given by Eq. 22–3, but by

c = 3.0 * 108 m(cid:2)s.

m

C A U T I O N
Sound and EM waves
are different

FIGURE 22–9 Coaxial cable.

v =

1
1(cid:3)m

instead.

SECTION 22–3 Light as an Electromagnetic Wave and the Electromagnetic Spectrum 631

EXAMPLE 22;3 ESTIMATE
Phone call time lag. You make a telephone
call from New York to a friend in London. Estimate how long it will take the
electrical signal generated by your voice to reach London, assuming the signal
is (a) carried on a telephone cable under the Atlantic Ocean, and (b) sent via
satellite 36,000 km above the ocean. Would there be a noticeable delay in either
case?
APPROACH The signal is carried on a telephone wire or in the air via satellite.
In either case it is an electromagnetic wave. Electronics as well as the wire or
cable  slow  things  down, but  as  a rough  estimate  we  take  the  speed  to  be
c = 3.0 * 108 m(cid:2)s.
SOLUTION The distance from New York to London is about 5000 km.
(a) The  time  delay  via  the  cable  is
0.017 s.
(b) Via  satellite  the  time  would  be  longer  because  communications  satellites,
which  are  usually  geosynchronous  (Example  5–12), move  at  a height  of
36,000 km. The signal would have to go up to the satellite and back down, or
about 72,000 km. The actual distance the signal would travel would be a little
more  than  this  as  the  signal  would  go  up  and  down  on  a diagonal  (5000 km
New York to London, small compared to the distance up to the satellite). Thus
t = d(cid:2)c L A7.2 * 107 mB(cid:2)A3 * 108 m(cid:2)sB L 0.24 s
 s.
NOTE When the signal travels via the underwater cable, there is only a hint of a
delay and conversations are fairly normal. When the signal is sent via satellite, the
delay is noticeable. The length of time between the end of when you speak and
your friend receives it and replies, and then you hear the reply, would be about
a half second beyond the normal time in a conversation, as we just calculated.
This is enough to be noticeable, and you have to adjust for it so you don’t start
talking again while your friend’s reply is on the way back to you.

t = d(cid:2)c L A5 * 106 mB(cid:2)A3.0 * 108 m(cid:2)sB =

, one way. Both directions

L 1
2

EXERCISE E If you are on the phone via satellite to someone only 100 km away, would
you notice the same effect discussed in the NOTE above?

EXERCISE F If your voice traveled as a sound wave, how long would it take to go from
New York to London?

22–4 Measuring the Speed of Light

Galileo attempted to measure the speed of light by trying to measure the time
required for light to travel a known distance between two hilltops. He stationed
an assistant on one hilltop and himself on another, and ordered the assistant to
lift the cover from a lamp the instant he saw a flash from Galileo’s lamp. Galileo
measured the time between the flash of his lamp and when he received the light
from his assistant’s lamp. The time was so short that Galileo concluded it merely
represented human reaction time, and that the speed of light must be extremely
high.

The first successful determination that the speed of light is finite was made
by the Danish astronomer Ole Roemer (1644–1710). Roemer had noted that the
carefully measured orbital period of Io, a moon of Jupiter with an average period
of 42.5 h, varied slightly, depending on the relative position of Earth and Jupiter.
He  attributed  this  variation  in  the  apparent  period  to  the  change  in  distance
between the Earth and Jupiter during one of Io’s periods, and the time it took
light  to  travel  the  extra  distance. Roemer  concluded  that  the  speed  of  light—
though great—is finite.

Since then a number of techniques have been used to measure the speed of
light. Among the most important were those carried out by the American Albert A.
Michelson (1852–1931). Michelson used the rotating mirror apparatus diagrammed

632 CHAPTER 22 Electromagnetic Waves

Observer

Eight-sided
rotating
mirror

Light
source

(Mt. Wilson)

Stationary
mirror

(Mt. Baldy)

35 km

FIGURE 22–10 Michelson’s speed-
of-light apparatus (not to scale).

in Fig. 22–10 for a series of high-precision experiments carried out from 1880 to
the 1920s. Light from a source would hit one face of a rotating eight-sided mirror.
The reflected light traveled to a stationary mirror a large distance away and back
again as shown. If the rotating mirror was turning at just the right rate, the return-
ing beam of light would reflect from one face of the mirror into a small telescope
through  which  the  observer  looked. If  the  speed  of  rotation  was  only  slightly
different, the beam would be deflected to one side and would not be seen by the
observer. From the required speed of the rotating mirror and the known distance
to  the  stationary  mirror, the  speed  of  light  could  be  calculated. In  the  1920s,
Michelson set up the rotating mirror on the top of Mt. Wilson in southern California
and the stationary mirror on Mt. Baldy (Mt. San Antonio) 35 km away. He later
measured the speed of light in vacuum using a long evacuated tube.

Today the speed of light, c, in vacuum is taken as
c = 2.99792458 * 108 m(cid:2)s,

and is defined to be this value. This means that the standard for length, the meter,
is no longer defined separately. Instead, as we noted in Section 1–5, the meter is
now formally defined as the distance light travels in vacuum in 1 299,792,458 of
a second.

(cid:2)

We usually round off c to

c = 3.00 * 108 m(cid:2)s

when extremely precise results are not required. In air, the speed is only slightly
less.

22–5 Energy in EM Waves

Electromagnetic waves carry energy from one region of space to another. This
energy is associated with the moving electric and magnetic fields. In Section 17–9,
E2
we saw that the energy density
(Eq. 17–11). The energy density stored in a magnetic field B, as we discussed in
Section 21–11, is given by
(Eq. 21–10). Thus, the total energy stored
per unit volume in a region of space where there is an electromagnetic wave is

stored in an electric field E is

 AJ(cid:2)m3B

B2(cid:2)m
0

= 1
2

= 1
2

u

u

u

(cid:3)

E

E

B

0

u = u

+ u

B

E

= 1
2

(cid:3)

0

E2 + 1
2

B2
m
0

.

(22;5)

In this equation, E and B represent the electric and magnetic field strengths of
the  wave  at  any  instant  in  a small  region  of  space. We  can  write  Eq. 22–5  in
terms of the E field only using Eqs. 22–2
to
obtain

(c = 1(cid:2) 1(cid:3)

and 22–3

(B = E(cid:2)c)

m
0

)

0

u = 1
2

(cid:3)

0

E2 + 1
2

E2

(cid:3)

0

m
0
m
0

= (cid:3)

E2.

0

(22;6a)

Note here that the energy density associated with the B field equals that due to
the E field, and each contributes half to the total energy. We can also write the
energy density in terms of the B field only:

u = (cid:3)

0

E2 = (cid:3)

0

c2B2 =

B2
m
0

,

or in one term containing both E and B,

u = (cid:3)

E2 = (cid:3)

0 EcB =

0

or

u =

(cid:3)
0
m
0

B

EB.

(cid:3)
2(cid:3)

0 EB
m
0

0

(22;6b)

(22;6c)

Equations 22–6 give the energy density of EM waves in any region of space at
any instant.

SECTION 22–5 Energy in EM Waves

633

FIGURE 22–11 Electromagnetic
wave carrying energy through area A.

z

y

x

B
B

A

x

B
E

Δ x = c Δt

The energy a wave transports per unit time per unit area is the intensity I, as
defined in Sections 11–9 and 12–2.† The units of I are
is
the energy density (Eq. 22–6a) times the volume V. Hence the energy passing
(see Fig. 22–11) is
through an area A in a time
¢U = u ¢V = (u)(A ¢x) = A(cid:3)

E2B(Ac ¢t)

The energy

W(cid:2)m2.

¢U

¢t

0

because
per time

¢x = c ¢t.
¢t,

or power per unit area) is

Therefore, the magnitude of the intensity (energy per unit area

I =

¢U
A ¢t

=

A(cid:3)

0

E2B(Ac ¢t)

A ¢t

= (cid:3)

0 cE2.

From Eqs. 22–2 and 22–3, this can also be written
0 cE2 = c
m
0

B2 = EB
m
0

I = (cid:3)

.

(22;7)

We can also find the average intensity over an extended period of time, if E and B
y = E
are  sinusoidal. Then
just  as  for  electric  currents  and  voltages,
Section 18–7, Eqs. 18–8. Thus

2(cid:2)2
,
0

I = 1
2

(cid:3)

0 cE0

2 = 1
2

c
m
0

2 =
B
0

B
E
0
0
2m
0

.

(22;8)

Here

E
0

and

B
0

are the maximum values of E and B. We can also write

I =

,

Erms Brms
m
0
Brms
are  the  rms  values
(cid:2)22 B.

AErms = 3y = E
0

Erms
where
and
Brms = 3¿ = B
0
EXAMPLE 22;4
the Earth (above the atmosphere) with an intensity of about
1350 J(cid:2)s(cid:4)m2.
values of E and B.
APPROACH We  solve  Eq. 22–8
I = 1350 J(cid:2)s(cid:4)m2.

E and B from the Sun. Radiation from the Sun reaches
1350 W(cid:2)m2 =
Assume that this is a single EM wave, and calculate the maximum

(cid:2)22 ,

and

I

and  use

in  terms  of

AI = 1
2

for

E
0

cE

2B
0

(cid:3)

0

SOLUTION

E
0

=

2I
c
(cid:3)

0

C

=

2A1350 J(cid:2)s(cid:4)m2B
A8.85 * 10–12 C2(cid:2)N(cid:4)m2BA3.00 * 108 m(cid:2)sB

C

C A U T I O N

E and B have very different
values (due to how units are defined),
but E and B contribute equal energy

= 1.01 * 103 V(cid:2)m.
so

From Eq. 22–2,

B
0

B = E(cid:2)c,
E
0
c

=

= 1.01 * 103 V(cid:2)m
3.00 * 108 m(cid:2)s

= 3.37 * 10–6 T.

NOTE Although B has a small numerical value compared to E (because of the
way the different units for E and B are defined), B contributes the same energy
to the wave as E does, as we saw earlier.

B
†The intensity I for EM waves is often called the Poynting vector and given the symbol
S
Its direction
.
is that in which the energy is being transported, which is the direction the wave is traveling, and its
magnitude is the intensity (S = I).

634 CHAPTER 22 Electromagnetic Waves

22–6 Momentum Transfer and
Radiation Pressure

If electromagnetic waves carry energy, then we would expect them to also carry
linear momentum. When an electromagnetic wave encounters the surface of an
object, a force will be exerted on the surface as a result of the momentum trans-
just as when a moving object strikes a surface. The force per
fer
unit area exerted by the waves is called radiation pressure, and its existence was
predicted  by  Maxwell. He  showed  that  if  a beam  of  EM  radiation  (light, for
example) is completely absorbed by an object, then the momentum transferred is

(F = ¢p(cid:2)¢t)

,

¢p =

¢U
c

radiation
c
 fully
 absorbed
where
and c is the speed of
light. If, instead, the radiation is fully reflected (suppose the object is a mirror), then
the momentum transferred is twice as great, just as when a ball bounces elastically
off a surface:

is the energy absorbed by the object in a time

(22;9a)

¢U

¢t

d

¢p = 2 ¢U
c

.

c

(22;9b)

radiation
d
 fully
 reflected

If a surface absorbs some of the energy, and reflects some of it, then
where a has a value between 1 and 2.

¢p = a ¢U(cid:2)c,

Using  Newton’s  second  law  we  can  calculate  the  force  and  the  pressure

exerted by EM radiation on an object. The force F is given by

F =

¢p
¢t

.

The radiation pressure P (assuming full absorption) is given by (see Eq. 22–9a)

¢p
¢t

F
A

P =

= 1
Ac

= 1
A
I
We discussed in Section 22–5 that the average intensity
unit time per unit area:
¢U
A ¢t

I =

.

.

¢U
¢t

is defined as energy per

Hence the radiation pressure is

P =

I
c

.

c fully
absorbed

d

(22;10a)

If the light is fully reflected, the radiation pressure is twice as great (Eq. 22–9b):

P = 2I
c

.

c fully
reflected

d

(22;10b)

EXAMPLE 22;5 ESTIMATE
Solar pressure. Radiation from the Sun that
reaches the Earth’s surface (after passing through the atmosphere) transports
1000 W(cid:2)m2.
energy at a rate of about
Estimate the pressure and force exerted
by the Sun on your outstretched hand.
APPROACH The radiation is partially reflected and partially absorbed, so let
us estimate simply

SOLUTION

P L

L 3 * 10–6 N(cid:2)m2.

P = I(cid:2)c.
I
c

= 1000 W(cid:2)m2
3 * 108 m(cid:2)s

An  estimate  of  the  area  of  your  outstretched  hand  might  be  about  10 cm  by
20 cm, so

Then the force is

A L 0.02 m2.

F = PA L A3 * 10–6 N(cid:2)m2BA0.02 m2B L 6 * 10–8 N.
NOTE These numbers are tiny. The force of gravity on your hand, for compari-
m = 0.2 kg,
2 N.
son, is maybe a half pound, or with
The radiation pressure on your hand is imperceptible compared to gravity.

mg L (0.2 kg)A9.8 m(cid:2)s2B L

SECTION 22–6 635

+ at.

v = v
0

F = PA.

P = 2I(cid:2)c.

1 km * 1 km

(c) The distance traveled is given by

EXAMPLE 22;6 ESTIMATE
A solar sail. Proposals have been made to use
the radiation pressure from the Sun to help propel spacecraft around the solar
highly
system. (a) About how much force would be applied on a
reflective sail when about the same distance from the Sun as the Earth is?
(b) By how much would this increase the speed of a 5000-kg spacecraft in one year?
(c) If the spacecraft started from rest, about how far would it travel in a year?
APPROACH (a) Pressure P is force per unit area, so
We use the estimate
of Example 22–5, doubling it for a reflecting surface
(b) We find the
acceleration from Newton’s second law, and assume it is constant, and then find
the speed from
SOLUTION (a)  Doubling  the  result  of  Example  22–5, we  get  a  solar  pressure
F L PA =
that  is  about
A10–5 N(cid:2)m2BA103 mBA103 mB L 10 N.
(b)  The  acceleration  is
year  has
v - v
0

One
The  speed  increase  is
A2 * 10–3 m(cid:2)s2BA3 * 107 sB L 6 * 104 m(cid:2)s (L 200,000 km(cid:2)h!).
(c)  Starting  from  rest, this  acceleration  would  result  in  a distance  traveled  of
A2 * 10–3 m(cid:2)s2BA3 * 107 sB2 L 1012 m
about
in a year, about seven
times the Sun–Earth distance. This result would apply if the spacecraft was far
from the Earth so the Earth’s gravitational force is small compared to 10 N.
NOTE A large sail providing a small force over a long time could result in a lot
of motion. [Gravity due to the Sun and planets has been ignored, but in reality
would have to be considered.]

(365 days)(24 h(cid:2)day)(3600 s(cid:2)h) L 3 * 107 s.

rounding  off. Then  the  force  is

(10 N)(cid:2)(5000 kg) L

2I(cid:2)c L 10–5 N(cid:2)m2,

2 * 10–3 m(cid:2)s2.

a L F(cid:2)m L

at2 L 1
2

d = 1
2

x = 1
2

= at L

at2.

Although  you  cannot  directly  feel  the  effects  of  radiation  pressure, the
phenomenon  is  quite  dramatic  when  applied  to  atoms  irradiated  by  a finely
10–27 kg,
and  a laser
focused  laser  beam. An  atom  has  a mass  on  the  order  of
1000 W(cid:2)m2.
This is the same intensity used in
beam can deliver energy at a rate of
10–6 N(cid:2)m2
Example 22–5, but here a radiation pressure of
would be very signif-
10–26 kg.
icant on a molecule whose mass might be
It is possible to move
to
atoms  and  molecules  around  by  steering  them  with  a laser  beam, in  a device
called optical  tweezers. Optical  tweezers  have  some  remarkable  applications.
They are of great interest to biologists, especially since optical tweezers can manip-
ulate live microorganisms, and components within a cell, without damaging them.
Optical tweezers have been used to measure the elastic properties of DNA by
pulling each end of the molecule with such a laser “tweezers.”

10–23

22–7 Radio and Television;

Wireless Communication
Electromagnetic waves offer the possibility of transmitting information over long
distances. Among the first to realize this and put it into practice was Guglielmo
Marconi (1874–1937) who, in the 1890s, invented and developed wireless commu-
nication. With it, messages could be sent at the speed of light without the use of
wires. The first signals were merely long and short pulses that could be translated
into words by a code, such as the “dots” and “dashes” of the Morse code: they
were  digital  wireless, believe  it  or  not. In  1895  Marconi  sent  wireless  signals  a
kilometer  or  two  in  Italy. By  1901  he  had  sent  test  signals  3000 km  across  the
ocean from Newfoundland, Canada, to Cornwall, England (Fig. 22–12). In 1903
he sent the first practical commercial messages from Cape Cod, Massachusetts,
to  England: the  London  Times printed  news  items  sent  from  its  New  York
correspondent. 1903 was also the year of the first powered airplane flight by the
Wright brothers. The hallmarks of the modern age—wireless communication and
flight—date  from  the  same  year. Our  modern  world  of  wireless  communication,
including radio, television, cordless phones, cell phones, Bluetooth, wi-fi, and satellite
communication, are based on Marconi’s pioneering work.

P H Y S I C S   A P P L I E D
Optical tweezers
(move cell parts,
DNA elasticity)

P H Y S I C S   A P P L I E D
Wireless transmission

FIGURE 22–12 Guglielmo Marconi
(1874–1937), on the left, receiving
signals in Cornwall, 1901.

636 CHAPTER 22 Electromagnetic Waves

The  next  decade  saw  the  development  of  vacuum  tubes. Out  of  this  early
work radio and television were born. We now discuss briefly (1) how radio and
TV signals are transmitted, and (2) how they are received at home.

(cid:2)

The process by which a radio station transmits information (words and music)
is outlined in Fig. 22–13. The audio (sound) information is changed into an elec-
trical signal of the same frequencies by, say, a microphone, a laser, or a magnetic
read write head. This electrical signal is called an audiofrequency (AF) signal,
because the frequencies are in the audio range (20 to 20,000 Hz). The signal is ampli-
fied electronically and is then mixed with a radio-frequency (RF) signal called its
carrier frequency, which represents that station. AM radio stations have carrier
frequencies from about 530 kHz to 1700 kHz. For example, “710 on your dial”
means a station whose carrier frequency is 710 kHz. FM radio stations have much
higher carrier frequencies, between 88 MHz and 108 MHz. The carrier frequencies
for broadcast TV stations in the United States lie between 54 MHz and 72 MHz,
between  76 MHz  and  88 MHz, between  174 MHz  and  216 MHz, and  between
470 MHz and 698 MHz. Today’s digital broadcasting (see Sections 17–10 and 17–11)
uses the same frequencies as the pre-2009 analog transmission.

Sound
waves

Audio
signal
(electrical)

Microphone

Audio
signal
(amplified)

AF
amplifier

Modulated
signal

Mixer

RF
amplifier

Transmitting
antenna

RF signal = carrier

RF
oscillator

The  mixing  of  the  audio  and  carrier  frequencies  is  done  in  two  ways. In
amplitude modulation (AM), the amplitude of the high-frequency carrier wave
is  made  to  vary  in  proportion  to  the  amplitude  of  the  audio  signal, as  shown  in
Fig. 22–14. It is called “amplitude modulation” because the amplitude of the car-
rier is altered (“modulate” means to change or alter). In frequency modulation (FM),
the frequency of the carrier wave is made to change in proportion to the audio
signal’s amplitude, as shown in Fig. 22–15. The mixed signal is amplified further
and  sent  to  the  transmitting  antenna  (Fig. 22–13), where  the  complex  mixture
of  frequencies  is  sent  out  in  the  form  of  EM  waves. In  digital  communication,
the signal is put into digital form (Section 17–10) which modulates the carrier.

A television transmitter works in a similar way, using FM for audio and AM

for video; both audio and video signals are mixed with carrier frequencies.

FIGURE 22–13 Block diagram of
a radio transmitter.

P H Y S I C S   A P P L I E D

AM and FM

Program (audio)

Program (audio)

Carrier

Carrier

Total signal (AM)

Total signal (FM)

FIGURE 22–14 In amplitude modulation (AM),
the amplitude of the carrier signal is made
to vary in proportion to the audio signal’s
amplitude.

FIGURE 22–15 In frequency modulation (FM),
the frequency of the carrier signal is made
to change in proportion to the audio signal’s
amplitude. This method is used by FM radio
and television.

SECTION 22–7 Radio and Television; Wireless Communication 637

FIGURE 22–16 Block diagram of
a simple radio receiver.

Receiving
antenna

RF
signal

RF tuner
and amplifier

Demodulator

Audio
signal

AF
amplifier

Loudspeaker

P H Y S I C S   A P P L I E D
Radio and TV receivers

FIGURE 22–17 Simple tuning stage
of a radio.
Antenna

Transistor
amplifier

Tuning
circuit

Now let us look at the other end of the process, the reception of radio and TV
programs at home. A simple radio receiver is diagrammed in Fig. 22–16. The EM
waves sent out by all stations are received by the antenna. The signals the antenna
detects and sends to the receiver are very small and contain frequencies from many
different stations. The receiver uses a resonant LC circuit (Section 21–15) to select
out a particular RF frequency (actually a narrow range of frequencies) correspond-
ing to a particular station. A simple way of tuning a station is shown in Fig. 22–17.
A particular station is “tuned in” by adjusting C and or L so that the resonant
Eq. 21–19) equals that of the station’s
frequency of the circuit (
carrier frequency. The signal, containing both audio and carrier frequencies, next
goes to the demodulator, or detector (Fig. 22–16), where “demodulation” takes
place—that is, the audio signal is separated from the RF carrier frequency. The
audio signal is amplified and sent to a loudspeaker or headphones.

= 1(cid:2)A2p1LCB,

f
0

(cid:2)

C

B
E

Modern receivers have more stages than those shown. Various means are used
to increase the sensitivity and selectivity (ability to detect weak signals and dis-
tinguish  them  from  other  stations), and  to  minimize  distortion  of  the  original
signal.†

A television receiver does similar things to both the audio and the video signals.
The audio signal goes finally to the loudspeaker, and the video signal to the monitor
screen, such as an LCD (Sections 17–11 and 24–11).

B
E

Antenna rod

I

Current produced
by electric field

To receiver

Loop
antenna

B
B

B
B

Induced
current

EM wave

direction

B
E

B
E

(a)

B
B

B
B

To
receiver
(TV set)

(b)

FIGURE 22–18 Antennas. (a) Electric field of EM wave produces a current in an antenna consisting of
straight wire or rods. (b) The moving and changing magnetic field induces an emf and current in a loop antenna.

FIGURE 22–19 A satellite dish.

One kind of antenna consists of one or more conducting rods; the electric field
in the EM waves exerts a force on the electrons in the conductor, causing them to
move back and forth at the frequencies of the waves (Fig. 22–18a). A second type
of antenna consists of a tubular coil of wire which detects the magnetic field of the
wave: the changing B field induces an emf in the coil (Fig. 22–18b). A satellite dish
(Fig. 22–19) consists of a parabolic reflector that focuses the EM waves onto a
“horn,” similar to a concave mirror telescope (Fig. 25–22).

†For FM stereo broadcasting, two signals are carried by the carrier wave. One signal contains frequencies
up to about 15 kHz, which includes most audio frequencies. The other signal includes the same range
of frequencies, but 19 kHz is added to it. A stereo receiver subtracts this 19,000-Hz signal and distributes
the two signals to the left and right channels. The first signal consists of the sum of left and right channels
(L + R),
so monophonic radios (one speaker) detect all the sound. The second signal is the difference
between left and right
Hence a stereo receiver must add and subtract the two signals to get
pure left and right signals for each channel.

(L - R).

638 CHAPTER 22 Electromagnetic Waves

Tuning a station. Calculate the transmitting wavelength of

EXAMPLE 22;7
an FM radio station that transmits at 100.1 MHz.
APPROACH Radio
c = 3.0 * 108 m(cid:2)s.
SOLUTION The carrier frequency is

is  transmitted  as  an  EM  wave,
The wavelength is found from Eq. 22–4,

so  the  speed
l = c(cid:2)f.
f = 100.1 MHz L 1.0 * 108 s–1,

so

is

l =

c
f

=

A3.0 * 108 m(cid:2)sB
A1.0 * 108 s–1B

= 3.0 m.

NOTE The wavelengths of other FM signals (88 MHz to 108 MHz) are close to
the 3.0-m wavelength of this station. FM antennas are typically 1.5 m long, or about
a half wavelength. This length is chosen so that the antenna reacts in a resonant
fashion and thus is more sensitive to FM frequencies. AM radio antennas would
have to be very long and impractical to be either

l.

l

1
2

or 1
4

Other EM Wave Communications
The  various  regions  of  the  radio-wave  spectrum  are  assigned  by  governmental
agencies for various purposes. Besides those mentioned above, there are “bands”
assigned for use by ships, airplanes, police, military, amateurs, satellites and space,
and radar. Cell phones, for example, are complete radio transmitters and receivers.
In  the  U.S., CDMA  cell  phones  function  on  two  different  bands: 800 MHz  and
1900 MHz
Europe, Asia, and much of the rest of the world use a dif-
ferent system: the international standard called GSM (Global System for Mobile
Communication), on  900-MHz  and  1800-MHz  bands. The  U.S. now  also  has  the
GSM option (at 850 MHz and 1.9 GHz), as does much of the rest of the Americas.
A  700-MHz  band  is  being  made  available  for  cell  phones  (it  used  to  carry TV
broadcast  channels, no  longer  used). Radio-controlled  toys  (cars, sailboats,
robotic  animals, etc.) can  use  various  frequencies  from  27 MHz  to  75 MHz.
Automobile remote entry (keyless) may operate around 300 MHz or 400 MHz.

(=  1.9 GHz).

Cable TV channels are carried as electromagnetic waves along a coaxial cable
(Fig. 22–9) rather than being broadcast and received through the “air.” The channels
are  in  the  same  part  of  the  EM  spectrum, hundreds  of  MHz, but  some  are  at
frequencies not available for TV broadcast. Digital satellite TV and radio are carried
in the microwave portion of the spectrum (12 to 14 GHz and 2.3 GHz, respectively).

Wireless from the Moon
In  1969, astronauts  first  landed  on  the  Moon. It  was  shown  live  on  television
(Fig. 22–20). The transmitting TV camera can be seen in the Chapter-Opening
photo, page  625. At  that  time, someone  pointed  out  that  Columbus  and  other
early  navigators  could  have  imagined  that  humans  might  one  day  reach  the
Moon. But they would never have believed possible that moving images could be
sent from the Moon to the Earth through empty space.

P H Y S I C S   A P P L I E D
Cell phones, remote controls,
cable TV, satellite TV and radio

FIGURE 22–20 The first person on
the Moon, Neil Armstrong, July 20,
1969, pointed out “One small step for
a man, one giant leap for mankind.”

Summary

James Clerk Maxwell synthesized an elegant theory in which
all electric and magnetic phenomena could be described using
four equations, now called Maxwell’s equations. They are based
on earlier ideas, but Maxwell added one more—that a changing
electric field produces a magnetic field.

Maxwell’s theory predicted that transverse electromagnetic
(EM) waves would be produced by accelerating electric charges,
and these waves would propagate (move) through space at the
speed of light:

c =

1
2(cid:3)

0

= 3.00 * 108 m(cid:2)s.

(22;3)

m
0

The oscillating electric and magnetic fields in an EM wave
are perpendicular to each other and to the direction of propa-
gation. These EM waves are waves of fields, not matter, and can
propagate in empty space.

The wavelength  and frequency f of EM waves are related

l

to their speed c by

c = lf

(22;4)

just as for other waves.

Summary 639

After EM waves were experimentally detected, it became
generally accepted that light is an EM wave. The electromagnetic
spectrum includes EM waves of a wide variety of wavelengths,
from  microwaves  and  radio  waves  to  visible  light  to  X-rays
and gamma rays, all of which travel through space at a speed
c = 3.0 * 108 m(cid:2)s.

The average intensity
2 = 1
2

I = 1
2

0 cE0

(cid:3)

AW(cid:2)m2B
c
m
0

2 = 1
B
0
2

of an EM wave is
B
0

E
0
m
0

,

(22;8)

Questions

1. The electric field in an EM wave traveling north oscillates in
an east–west plane. Describe the direction of the magnetic
field vector in this wave. Explain.

2. Is sound an EM wave? If not, what kind of wave is it?

3. Can EM waves travel through a perfect vacuum? Can sound

waves?

4. When you flip a light switch on, does the light go on imme-

diately? Explain.

5. Are the wavelengths of radio and television signals longer

or shorter than those detectable by the human eye?

6. When you connect two loudspeakers to the output of a stereo
amplifier, should you be sure the lead-in wires are equal in
length to avoid a time lag between speakers? Explain.

7. In the electromagnetic spectrum, what type of EM wave would
1 km? 1 m? 1 cm? 1 mm? 1 mm?

have a wavelength of

103 km?

MisConceptual Questions

1. In a vacuum, what is the difference between a radio wave

and an X-ray?
(a) Wavelength.

(b) Frequency.

(c) Speed.
10–10 m.

2. The radius of an atom is on the order of
parison, the wavelength of visible light is
(a) much smaller. (b) about the same size. (c) much larger.
3. Which of the following travel at the same speed as light?

In com-

(Choose all that apply.)
(a) Radio waves. (d) Ultrasonic waves.
(b) Microwaves.
(c) Radar.

(e) Infrared radiation. (h) X-rays.
(f) Cell phone signals.

(g) Gamma rays.

4. Which of the following types of electromagnetic radiation

travels the fastest?
(a) Radio waves.
(b) Visible light waves.
(c) X-rays.
(d) Gamma rays.
(e) All the above travel at the same speed.

5. In empty space, which quantity is always larger for X-ray

radiation than for a radio wave?
(a) Amplitude.
(b) Wavelength.

(c) Frequency.
(d) Speed.

6. If electrons in a wire vibrate up and down 1000 times per
second, they will create an electromagnetic wave having
(a) a wavelength of 1000 m.
(b) a frequency of 1000 Hz.

(c) a speed of
(d) an amplitude of 1000 m.
7. If the Earth–Sun distance were doubled, the intensity of radi-
ation  from  the  Sun  that  reaches  the  Earth’s  surface  would
1
(a) quadruple. (b) double. (c) drop to
2 .

(d) drop to 1
4 .

1000 m(cid:2)s.

640 CHAPTER 22 Electromagnetic Waves

E
0

B
where
0
fields, respectively, in the wave.

and

are the peak values of the electric and magnetic

EM waves carry momentum and exert a radiation pressure

proportional to the intensity I of the wave.

Radio, TV, cell phone, and other wireless signals are trans-
mitted through space in the radio-wave or microwave part of
the EM spectrum.

8. Can radio waves have the same frequencies as sound waves

(20 Hz–20,000 Hz)?

9. If  a radio  transmitter  has  a vertical  antenna, should  a
receiver’s  antenna  (rod  type)  be  vertical  or  horizontal  to
obtain best reception?

10. The carrier frequencies of FM broadcasts are much higher
than for AM broadcasts. On the basis of what you learned
about  diffraction  in  Chapter  11, explain  why AM  signals
can be detected more readily than FM signals behind low
hills or buildings.

11. Discuss how cordless telephones make use of EM waves.

What about cell phones?

12. A lost person may signal by switching a flashlight on and off
using Morse code. This is actually a modulated EM wave.
Is  it  AM  or  FM? What  is  the  frequency  of  the  carrier,
approximately?

8. An electromagnetic wave is traveling straight down toward
the center of the Earth. At a certain moment in time the
electric field points west. In which direction does the mag-
netic field point at this moment?
(a) North.
(b) South.
(c) East.

(g) Either (a) or (b).
(h) Either (c) or (d).
(i) Either (e) or (f).
9. If the intensity of an electromagnetic wave doubles,

(d) West.
(e) Up.
(f) Down.

(a) the electric field must also double.
(b) the magnetic field must also double.
(c) both the magnetic field and the electric field must

increase by a factor of

(d) Any of the above.

12 .

10. If all else is the same, for which surface would the radiation

pressure from light be the greatest?
(a) A black surface.
(b) A gray surface.
(c) A yellow surface.
(d) A white surface.
(e) All experience the same radiation pressure, because

they are exposed to the same light.

11. Starting in 2009, TV stations in the U.S. switched to digital
signals. [See Sections 22–7, 17–10, and 17–11.] To watch
today’s digital broadcast TV, could you use a pre-2009 TV
antenna meant for analog? Explain.
(a) No; analog antennas do not receive digital signals.
(b) No; digital signals are broadcast at different
frequencies, so you need a different antenna.

(c) Yes; digital signals are broadcast with the same carrier

frequencies, so your old antenna will be fine.
(d) No; you cannot receive digital signals through an
antenna and need to switch to cable or satellite.

For assigned homework and other learning materials, go to the MasteringPhysics website.

Problems

22–1

B
B

Produced by Changing

B
E

*1. (II) Determine the rate at which the electric field changes
between the round plates of a capacitor, 8.0 cm in diameter,
if the plates are spaced 1.1 mm apart and the voltage across
them is changing at a rate of

120 V(cid:2)s.

*2. (II)  Calculate  the  displacement  current

between  the
square plates, 5.8 cm on a side, of a capacitor if the electric
field is changing at a rate of

1.6 * 106 V(cid:2)m(cid:4)s.

ID

*3. (II) At a given instant, a 3.8-A current flows in the wires
connected to a parallel-plate capacitor. What is the rate at
which  the  electric  field  is  changing  between  the  plates  if
the square plates are 1.60 cm on a side?

*4. (III) A 1500-nF capacitor with circular parallel plates 2.0 cm
32.0 mC(cid:2)s
in diameter is accumulating charge at the rate of
at some instant in time. What will be the induced magnetic
field strength 10.0 cm radially outward from the center of
the plates? What will be the value of the field strength after
the capacitor is fully charged?

22–2 EM Waves

5. (I) If the electric field in an EM wave has a peak magnitude
what  is  the  peak  magnitude  of  the

0.72 * 10–4 V(cid:2)m,
of
magnetic field strength?

6. (I) If the magnetic field in a traveling EM wave has a peak
magnitude  of  10.5 nT, what  is  the  peak  magnitude  of  the
electric field?

7. (I) In an EM wave traveling west, the B field oscillates up
and  down  vertically  and  has  a frequency  of  90.0 kHz  and
an rms strength of
Determine the frequency
and rms strength of the electric field. What is the direction
of its oscillations?

7.75 * 10–9 T.

8. (I) How long does it take light to reach us from the Sun,

1.50 * 108 km

away?

9. (II) How long should it take the voices of astronauts on the

Moon to reach the Earth? Explain in detail.

22–3 Electromagnetic Spectrum

10. (I) An EM wave has a wavelength of 720 nm. What is its

frequency, and how would we classify it?

11. (I) An EM wave has frequency

7.14 * 1014 Hz.

What is its

wavelength, and how would we classify it?

12. (I)  A  widely  used  “short-wave” radio  broadcast  band  is
referred to as the 49-m band. What is the frequency of a
49-m radio signal?

13. (I) What is the frequency of a microwave whose wavelength

is 1.50 cm?

14. (II) Electromagnetic waves and sound waves can have the
same frequency. (a) What is the wavelength of a 1.00-kHz
electromagnetic  wave? (b)  What  is  the  wavelength  of  a
341 m(cid:2)s.
)
1.00-kHz sound wave? (The speed of sound in air is
(c) Can you hear a 1.00-kHz electromagnetic wave?
22.75 * 109 Hz

radar
signal? (b) What is the frequency of an X-ray with wave-
length 0.12 nm?

15. (II) (a) What is the wavelength of a

16. (II) How long would it take a message sent as radio waves
from  Earth  to  reach  Mars  when  Mars  is  (a)  nearest  Earth,
(b) farthest from Earth? Assume that Mars and Earth are
in the same plane and that their orbits around the Sun are
circles (Mars is

L 230 * 106 km

from the Sun).

17. (II) Our nearest star (other than the Sun) is 4.2 light-years
away. That is, it takes 4.2 years for the light it emits to reach
Earth. How far away is it in meters?

18. (II) A light-year is a measure of distance (not time). How

many meters does light travel in a year?

19. (II)  Pulsed  lasers  used  for  science  and  medicine  produce
very  brief  bursts  of  electromagnetic  energy. If  the  laser
light wavelength is 1062 nm (Neodymium–YAG laser), and
the pulse lasts for 34 picoseconds, how many wavelengths
are found within the laser pulse? How brief would the pulse
need to be to fit only one wavelength?

22–4 Measuring the Speed of Light

20. (II) What is the minimum angular speed at which Michel-
son’s eight-sided mirror would have had to rotate to reflect
light  into  an  observer’s  eye  by  succeeding  mirror  faces
(1 8 of a revolution, Fig. 22–10)?

(cid:2)

21. (II) A student wants to scale down Michelson’s light-speed
experiment  to  a size  that  will  fit  in  one  room. An  eight-
sided mirror is available, and the stationary mirror can be
mounted 12 m from the rotating mirror. If the arrangement
is otherwise as shown in Fig. 22–10, at what minimum rate
must the mirror rotate?

22–5 Energy in EM Wave

B
E

22. (I) The

22.5 mV(cid:2)m.
field in an EM wave has a peak of
What is the average rate at which this wave carries energy
across unit area per unit time?

23. (II) The magnetic field in a traveling EM wave has an rms
strength of 22.5 nT. How long does it take to deliver 365 J
of a wall that it hits perpendicularly?
of energy to
area
per hour by an EM wave whose E field has an rms strength
of

24. (II) How much energy is transported across a

30.8 mV(cid:2)m?

1.00-cm2

1.00 cm2

25. (II) A spherically spreading EM wave comes from an 1800-W
source. At  a distance  of  5.0 m, what  is  the  intensity, and
what is the rms value of the electric field?

26. (II)  If  the  amplitude  of  the  B field  of  an  EM  wave  is
2.2 * 10–7 T,
(a)  what  is  the  amplitude  of  the  E field?
(b) What is the average power transported across unit area
by the EM wave?

27. (II)  What  is  the  average  energy  contained  in  a

1.00-m3
volume  near  the  Earth’s  surface  due  to  radiant  energy
from the Sun? See Example 22–4.

28. (II) A 15.8-mW laser puts out a narrow beam 2.40 mm in
diameter. What are the rms values of E and B in the beam?
29. (II) Estimate the average power output of the Sun, given
reaches  the  upper  atmosphere  of

1350 W(cid:2)m2

that  about
the Earth.

30. (II) A high-energy pulsed laser emits a 1.0-ns-long pulse of
1.5 * 1011 W.
average power
The beam is nearly a cylinder
2.2 * 10–3 m
in  radius. Determine  (a)  the  energy  deliv-
ered in each pulse, and (b) the rms value of the electric field.

Problems

641

22–6 Radiation Pressure

31. (II) Estimate the radiation pressure due to a bulb that emits
25 W of EM radiation at a distance of 9.5 cm from the center
of the bulb. Estimate the force exerted on your fingertip if
you place it at this point.

1.0-m2

32. (II) What size should the solar panel on a satellite orbiting
Jupiter be if it is to collect the same amount of radiation
solar panel on a satellite orbiting
from the Sun as a
Earth? [Hint: Assume the inverse square law (Eq. 11–16b).]
33. (III) Suppose you have a car with a 100-hp engine. How large
a solar  panel  would  you  need  to  replace  the  engine  with
solar power? Assume that the solar panels can utilize 20% of
the maximum solar energy that reaches the Earth’s surface
(1000 W m2).

(cid:2)

22–7 Radio, TV

34. (I) What is the range of wavelengths for (a) FM radio (88 MHz

to 108 MHz) and (b) AM radio (535 kHz to 1700 kHz)?

35. (I)  Estimate  the  wavelength  for  a 1.9-GHz  cell  phone

transmitter.

38. (I) The variable capacitor in the tuner of an AM radio has a
capacitance of 2500 pF when the radio is tuned to a station
at 550 kHz. What must the capacitance be for a station near
the other end of the dial, 1610 kHz?

39. (I) The oscillator of a 98.3-MHz FM station has an induc-

tance of

1.8 mH.

What value must the capacitance be?

40. (II) A certain FM radio tuning circuit has a fixed capacitor
C = 810 pF.
Tuning is done by a variable inductance. What
range of values must the inductance have to tune stations
from 88 MHz to 108 MHz?

41. (II) An amateur radio operator wishes to build a receiver that
can  tune  a range  from  14.0 MHz  to  15.0 MHz. A  variable
capacitor  has  a minimum  capacitance  of  86 pF. (a) What
is  the  required  value  of  the  inductance? (b) What  is  the
maximum capacitance used on the variable capacitor?

42. (II) A satellite beams microwave radiation with a power of
13 kW toward the Earth’s surface, 550 km away. When the
beam strikes Earth, its circular diameter is about 1500 m.
Find the rms electric field strength of the beam.

36. (I)  Compare  980  on  the AM  dial  to  98.1  on  FM. Which

has the longer wavelength, and by what factor is it larger?
37. (I) What are the wavelengths for two TV channels that broad-
cast at 54.0 MHz (Channel 2) and 692 MHz (Channel 51)?

43. (III) A 1.60-m-long FM antenna is oriented parallel to the
electric field of an EM wave. How large must the electric
field be to produce a 1.00-mV (rms) voltage between the ends
of the antenna? What is the rate of energy transport per m2?

General Problems

44. Who  will  hear  the  voice  of  a singer  first: a  person  in  the
balcony 50.0 m away from the stage (see Fig. 22–21), or a
person 1200 km away at home whose ear is next to the radio
listening to a live broadcast? Roughly how much sooner?
Assume the microphone is a few centimeters from the singer
and the temperature is 20°C.

50.0 m

FIGURE 22–21 Problem 44.

45. A global positioning system (GPS) functions by determining
the travel times for EM waves from various satellites to a
land-based GPS receiver. If the receiver is to detect a change
in travel distance on the order of 3 m, what is the associated
change in travel time (in ns) that must be measured?
46. Light is emitted from an ordinary lightbulb filament in wave-
in duration. What is the length in

10–8 s

train bursts about
space of such wave trains?

47. The voice from an astronaut on the Moon (Fig. 22–22) was
beamed to a listening crowd on Earth. If you were standing
28 m  from  the  loudspeaker  on  Earth, what  was  the  total
time  lag  between  when
you heard the sound and
when the sound entered
a  microphone  on  the
Moon? Explain whether
the  microphone  was
inside  the  space  helmet,
or outside, and why.

FIGURE 22–22
Problem 47.

642 CHAPTER 22 Electromagnetic Waves

48. Radio-controlled clocks throughout the United States receive
a radio signal from a transmitter in Fort Collins, Colorado,
that accurately (within a microsecond) marks the beginning
of  each  minute. A  slight  delay, however, is  introduced
because this signal must travel from the transmitter to the
clocks. Assuming Fort Collins is no more than 3000 km from
any point in the U.S., what is the longest travel-time delay?
49. If the Sun were to disappear or radically change its output,
how long would it take for us on Earth to learn about it?
50. Cosmic microwave background radiation fills space with an
(a) Find the
average energy density of about
rms value of the electric field associated with this radiation.
(b) How far from a 7.5-kW radio transmitter emitting uni-
formly in all directions would you find a comparable value?
at a point 2.50 m from a light source
whose output is 18 W? Assume the bulb emits radiation of
a single frequency uniformly in all directions.

4 * 10–14 J(cid:2)m3.

51. What are

and

E
0

B
0

52. Estimate the rms electric field in the sunlight that hits Mars,
knowing that the Earth receives about
and that
Mars is 1.52 times farther from the Sun (on average) than
is the Earth.

1350 W(cid:2)m2

1.0 * 10–13 W(cid:2)m2

53. The  average  intensity  of  a particular  TV  station’s  signal
is
when  it  arrives  at  a 33-cm-diameter
satellite TV antenna. (a) Calculate the total energy received
by  the  antenna  during  4.0 hours  of  viewing  this  station’s
programs. (b) Estimate the amplitudes of the E and B fields
of the EM wave.

54. What length antenna would be appropriate for a portable

device that could receive satellite TV?

55. A  radio  station  is  allowed  to  broadcast  at  an  average
power not to exceed 25 kW. If an electric field amplitude
of
is considered to be acceptable for receiving
the radio transmission, estimate how many kilometers away
you might be able to detect this station.

0.020 V(cid:2)m

58. A point source emits light energy uniformly in all directions
at an average rate  with a single frequency f. Show that
the peak electric field in the wave is given by

P
0

E
0

=

m
cP
0
0
2pr2

.

B

[Hint: The surface area of a sphere is

4pr2
.]

59. What is the maximum power level of a radio station so as
to avoid electrical breakdown of air at a distance of 0.65 m
from  the  transmitting  antenna? Assume  the  antenna  is  a
point source. Air breaks down in an electric field of about
3 * 106 V(cid:2)m.

60. Estimate how long an AM antenna would have to be if it
or (b)  AM radio is roughly 1 MHz (530 kHz

l.

l

1
4

1
were (a)
2
to 1.7 MHz).

61. 12 km from a radio station’s transmitting antenna, the ampli-
What is the average

0.12 V(cid:2)m.

tude of the electric field is
power output of the radio station?

l.
Al = 5 * 10–7 mB

4. Laser light can be focused (at best) to a spot with a radius r
Suppose a 1.0-W beam of green
equal to its wavelength
laser light
forms such a spot and illuminates
a  cylindrical  object  of  radius  r and  length  r (Fig. 22–23).
Estimate (a) the radiation pressure and force on the object,
and (b) its acceleration, if its density equals that of water
and it absorbs all the radiation. [This order-of-magnitude
calculation convinced researchers of the feasibility of “optical
tweezers,” page 636.]

r

r

FIGURE 22–23
Search and Learn 4.

l (cid:2) 5 (cid:5) 10(cid:6)7 m

56. The radiation pressure (Section 22–6) created by electro-
magnetic waves might someday be used to power spacecraft
through the use of a “solar sail,” Example 22–6. (a) Assuming
total reflection, what would be the pressure on a solar sail
located  at  the  same  distance  from  the  Sun  as  the  Earth
)? (b)  Suppose  the  sail  material
(where
has a mass of
What would be the acceleration of
the  sail  due  to  solar  radiation  pressure? (c)  A  realistic
solar sail would have a payload. How big a sail would you
need to accelerate a 100-kg payload at

I = 1350 W(cid:2)m2

1 * 10–3 m(cid:2)s2?

1 g(cid:2)m2.

57. Suppose a 35-kW radio station emits EM waves uniformly
in all directions. (a) How much energy per second crosses a
1.0-m2
area 1.0 km from the transmitting antenna? (b) What
B
E
is the rms magnitude of the
field at this point, assuming
the station is operating at full power? What is the rms volt-
age induced in a 1.0-m-long vertical car antenna (c) 1.0 km
away, (d) 50 km away?

Search and Learn

1. How practical is solar power for various devices? Assume
1000 W(cid:2)m2
that on a sunny day, sunlight has an intensity of
at  the  surface  of  Earth  and  that  a  solar-cell  panel  can
convert 20% of that sunlight into electric power. Calculate
the area A of solar panel needed to power (a) a calculator
that consumes 50 mW, (b) a hair dryer that consumes 1500 W,
(c) a car that would require 40 hp. (d) In each case, would
the area A be small enough to be mounted on the device
itself, or in the case of (b) on the roof of a house?

2. A  powerful  laser  portrayed  in  a movie  provides  a  3-mm
diameter  beam  of  green  light  with  a power  of  3 W.
A good agent inside the Space Shuttle aims the laser beam
at an enemy astronaut hovering outside. The mass of the
enemy astronaut is 120 kg and the Space Shuttle 103,000 kg.
(a)  Determine  the “radiation-pressure” force  exerted  on
the enemy by the laser beam assuming her suit is perfectly
reflecting. (b)  If  the  enemy  is  30 m  from  the  Shuttle’s
center of mass, estimate the gravitational force the Shuttle
exerts on the enemy. (c) Which of the two forces is larger,
and by what factor?

3. The  Arecibo  radio  telescope  in  Puerto  Rico  can  detect
1 * 10–23 W(cid:2)m2.
a radio wave with an intensity as low as
Consider  a “best-case” scenario  for  communication  with
extraterrestrials: suppose  an  advanced  civilization  a dis-
tance x away from Earth is able to transform the entire power
output of a Sun-like star completely into a radio-wave signal
which is transmitted uniformly in all directions. (a) In order
for Arecibo to detect this radio signal, what is the maximum
value  for  x in  light-years
(b) How  does
this  maximum  value  compare  with  the  100,000-ly  size  of
our Milky Way galaxy? The intensity of sunlight at Earth’s
orbital distance from the Sun is
[Hint: Assume
the inverse square law (Eq. 11–16b).]

(1 ly L 1016 m)?

1350 W(cid:2)m2.

A N S W E R S   T O   E X E R C I S E S

A: (c).
B: (b).
C: (a)

3.8 * 106 Hz;

(b) 5.5 * 1018 Hz.

D: 45 cm.
E: Yes; the signal still travels 72,000 km.
F: Over 4 hours.

Search and Learn 643
