Magnets produce magnetic fields,
but so do electric currents. Compass
needles are magnets, and they align
along the direction of any magnetic
field present. Here, the compasses
show the presence (and direction)
of a magnetic field near a current-
carrying wire. We shall see in this
Chapter how magnetic field is
defined, and how magnetic fields
exert forces on electric currents and
on charged particles. We also discuss
useful applications of the interaction
between magnetic fields and electric
currents and moving electric charges,
such as motors and loudspeakers.

A P T

E

H

R

20C

CONTENTS

2 0 –1 Magnets and Magnetic Fields
2 0 –2 Electric Currents Produce

Magnetic Fields

2 0 –3 Force on an Electric Current
in a Magnetic Field;
Definition of

B
B

2 0 –4 Force on an Electric Charge
Moving in a Magnetic Field

2 0 –5 Magnetic Field Due to a

Long Straight Wire
2 0 –6 Force between Two Parallel

Wires

2 0 –7 Solenoids and Electromagnets
2 0 –8 Ampère’s Law
2 0 –9 Torque on a Current Loop;
Magnetic Moment

20–10 Applications: Motors,

Loudspeakers, Galvanometers

*20–11 Mass Spectrometer
*20–12 Ferromagnetism: Domains

and Hysteresis

560

Magnetism

CHAPTER-OPENING QUESTION—Guess now!
Which of the following can experience a force when placed in the magnetic field
of a magnet?

(a) An electric charge at rest.
(b) An electric charge moving.

(c) An electric current in a wire.
(d) Another magnet.

T he history of magnetism began thousands of years ago, when in a region of

Asia Minor known as Magnesia, rocks were found that could attract each
other. These rocks were called “magnets” after their place of discovery.
Not until the nineteenth century, however, was it seen that magnetism and
electricity are closely related. A crucial discovery was that electric currents produce
magnetic  effects  (we  will  say “magnetic  fields”)  like  magnets  do. All  kinds  of
practical devices depend on magnetism, from compasses to motors, loudspeakers,
computer memory, and electric generators.

20–1 Magnets and Magnetic Fields

You probably have observed a magnet attract paper clips, nails, and other objects
made of iron, as in Fig. 20–1. Any magnet, whether it is in the shape of a bar or a
horseshoe, has two ends or faces, called poles, which is where the magnetic effect
is strongest. If a bar magnet is suspended from a fine thread, it is found that one
pole of the magnet will always point toward the north. It is not known for sure
when  this  fact  was  discovered, but  it  is  known  that  the  Chinese  were  making
use  of  it  as  an  aid  to  navigation  by  the  eleventh  century  and  perhaps  earlier.

This is the principle of a compass. A compass needle is simply a bar magnet which
is supported at its center of gravity so that it can rotate freely. The pole of a freely
suspended magnet that points toward geographic north is called the north pole of
the magnet. The other pole points toward the south and is called the south pole.
It is a familiar observation that when two magnets are brought near one another,
each exerts a force on the other. The force can be either attractive or repulsive
and can be felt even when the magnets don’t touch. If the north pole of one bar
magnet is brought near the north pole of a second magnet, the force is repulsive.
Similarly, if the south poles are brought close, the force is repulsive. But when
the north pole of one magnet is brought near the south pole of another magnet,
the force is attractive. These results are shown in Fig. 20–2, and are reminiscent
of the forces between electric charges: like poles repel, and unlike poles attract.
But do not confuse magnetic poles with electric charge. They are very different.
One important difference is that a positive or negative electric charge can easily
be isolated. But an isolated single magnetic pole has never been observed. If a
bar  magnet  is  cut  in  half, you  do  not  obtain  isolated  north  and  south  poles.
Instead, two  new  magnets  are  produced, Fig. 20–3, each  with  north  (N)  and
south (S) poles. If the cutting operation is repeated, more magnets are produced,
each with a north and a south pole. Physicists have searched for isolated single
magnetic poles (monopoles), but no magnetic monopole has ever been observed.
Besides iron, a few other materials, such as cobalt, nickel, gadolinium, and
some of their oxides and alloys, show strong magnetic effects. They are said to be
ferromagnetic (from the Latin word ferrum for iron). Other materials show some
slight magnetic effect, but it is very weak and can be detected only with delicate
instruments. We will look in more detail at ferromagnetism in Section 20–12.

In Chapter 16, we used the concept of an electric field surrounding an electric
charge. In a similar way, we can picture a magnetic field surrounding a magnet. The
force one magnet exerts on another can then be described as the interaction between
one magnet and the magnetic field of the other. Just as we drew electric field lines, we
can also draw magnetic field lines. They can be drawn, as for electric field lines, so that

1. the direction of the magnetic field is tangent to a field line at any point, and
2. the  number  of  lines  per  unit  area  is  proportional  to  the  strength  of  the

magnetic field.

The direction of the magnetic field at a given location can be defined as the
direction that the north pole of a compass needle would point if placed at that loca-
tion. (We will give a more precise definition of magnetic field shortly.) Figure 20–4a
shows how thin iron filings (acting like tiny magnets) reveal the magnetic field
lines by lining up like the compass needles. The magnetic field determined in this
way for the field surrounding a bar magnet is shown in Fig. 20–4b. Notice that
because of our definition, the lines always point out from the north pole and in
toward the south pole of a magnet (the north pole of a magnetic compass needle
is attracted to the south pole of the magnet).

Magnetic  field  lines  continue  inside  a  magnet, as  indicated  in  Fig. 20–4b.
Indeed, given the lack of single magnetic poles, magnetic field lines always form
closed loops, unlike electric field lines that begin on positive charges and end on
negative charges.

N

S

FIGURE 20–1 A horseshoe magnet
attracts pins made of iron.

FIGURE 20–2 Like poles of two
magnets repel; unlike poles attract.

S

N

N

N

N

Repulsive

S

S

Repulsive

S

N

Attractive

S

N

S

C A U T I O N
Magnets do not attract all metals

FIGURE 20–3 If you split a magnet,
you won’t get isolated north and
south poles; instead, two new
magnets are produced, each with a
north and a south pole.

S

S

N

N

N

S

S N

S N S N S N

C A U T I O N
Magnetic field lines form closed
loops, unlike electric field lines

FIGURE 20–4 (a) Visualizing
magnetic field lines around a bar
magnet, using iron filings and
compass needles. The red end of the
bar magnet is its north pole. The
N pole of a nearby compass needle
points away from the north pole of
the magnet. (b) Diagram of
magnetic field lines for a bar magnet.

(a)

(b)

SECTION 20–1 561

North
geographic pole
(“true north”)

Rotation
axis

Compass

Magnetic
pole

N

W

E

S

S

N

Magnetic
pole

South
geographic pole

FIGURE 20–5 The Earth acts like a
huge magnet. But its magnetic poles
are not at the geographic poles (on
the Earth’s rotation axis).

Earth’s Magnetic Field
The Earth’s magnetic field is shown in Fig. 20–5, and is thought to be produced
by  electric  currents  in  the  Earth’s  molten  iron  outer  core. The  pattern  of  field
lines is almost as though there were an imaginary bar magnet inside the Earth.
Since the north pole (N) of a compass needle points north, the Earth’s magnetic
pole which is in the geographic north is magnetically a south pole, as indicated in
Fig. 20–5 by the S on the schematic bar magnet inside the Earth. Remember that
the north pole of one magnet is attracted to the south pole of another magnet.
Nonetheless, Earth’s  pole  in  the  north  is  still  often  called  the “north  magnetic
pole,” or “geomagnetic  north,” simply  because  it  is  in  the  north. Similarly, the
Earth’s southern magnetic pole, which is near the geographic south pole, is mag-
netically a north pole (N). The Earth’s magnetic poles do not coincide with the
geographic poles, which are on the Earth’s axis of rotation. The north magnetic
pole, for example, is in the Canadian Arctic, now on the order of 1000 km† from the
geographic north pole, or true north. This difference must be taken into account
for  accurate  use  of  a  compass  (Fig. 20–6). The  angular  difference  between  the
direction of a compass needle (which points along the magnetic field lines) at any
location and true (geographical) north is called the magnetic declination. In the
U.S. it varies from 0° to about 20°, depending on location.

Notice in Fig. 20–5 that the Earth’s magnetic field at most locations is not
tangent to the Earth’s surface. The angle that the Earth’s magnetic field makes
with  the  horizontal  at  any  point  is  referred  to  as  the  angle  of  dip, or  the
“inclination.” It is 67° at New York, for example, and 55° at Miami.

EXERCISE A Does the Earth’s magnetic field have a greater magnitude near the poles
or near the equator? [How can you tell using the field lines in Fig. 20–5?]

P H Y S I C S   A P P L I E D
Use of a compass

FIGURE 20–6 Using a map and compass in the
wilderness. First you align the compass case so the
needle points away from true north (N) exactly
the number of degrees of declination stated
on the map (for this topographic map, it is 17° as
shown just to the left of the compass). Then align
the map with true north, as shown, not with the
compass needle. [This is an old map (1953) of a
part of California; on new maps (2012) the
declination is only 13°, telling us the position of
magnetic north has moved—see footnote below.]

FIGURE 20–7 Magnetic field
between two wide poles of a magnet
is nearly uniform, except near the
edges.

N

S

562 CHAPTER 20 Magnetism

Uniform Magnetic Field
The simplest magnetic field is one that is uniform—it doesn’t change in magni-
tude or direction from one point to another. A perfectly uniform field over a large
area is not easy to produce. But the field between two flat parallel pole pieces
of  a  magnet  is  nearly  uniform  if  the  area  of  the  pole  faces  is  large  compared
to their separation, as shown in Fig. 20–7. At the edges, the field “fringes” out
somewhat: the magnetic field lines are no longer quite parallel and uniform. The
parallel  evenly  spaced  field  lines  in  the  central  region  of  the  gap  indicate  that
the field is uniform at points not too near the edges, much like the electric field
between two parallel plates (Fig. 17–1).

†Earth’s north magnetic pole has been moving over time, on the order of 10 km per year in recent
decades. Magnetism in rocks solidified at various times in the past (age determined by radioactive
dating—see Section 30–11) suggests that Earth’s magnetic poles have not only moved significantly
over  geologic  time, but  have  also  reversed  direction  400  times  over  the  last  330 million  years.
Also  note  that  a  compass  gives  a  false  reading  if  you  are  standing  on  rock  containing  magnetized
iron ore (as you move around, the compass needle is inconsistent).

I

I

I

B

B

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

FIGURE 20–8 (a) Deflection of compass needles near a current-carrying wire, showing the presence and
direction of the magnetic field. (b) Iron filings also align along the direction of the magnetic field lines near a
straight current-carrying wire. (c) Diagram of the magnetic field lines around an electric current in a straight wire.
(d) Right-hand rule for remembering the direction of the magnetic field: when the thumb points in the direction of
the conventional current, the fingers wrapped around the wire point in the direction of the magnetic field. (
is the
symbol for magnetic field.)

B
B

20–2 Electric Currents Produce

Magnetic Fields

During the eighteenth century, many scientists sought to find a connection between
electricity and magnetism. A stationary electric charge and a magnet were shown to
have no influence on each other. But in 1820, Hans Christian Oersted (1777–1851)
found that when a compass is placed near a wire, the compass needle deflects if
(and  only  if)  the  wire  carries  an  electric  current. As  we  have  seen, a compass
needle  is  deflected  by  a  magnetic  field. So  Oersted’s  experiment  showed  that
an electric current produces a magnetic field. He had found a connection between
electricity and magnetism.

A compass needle placed near a straight section of current-carrying wire expe-
riences a force, causing the needle to align tangent to a circle around the wire,
Fig. 20–8a. Thus, the magnetic field lines produced by a current in a straight wire
are in the form of circles with the wire at their center, Figs. 20–8b and c. The direction
of  these  lines  is  indicated  by  the  north  pole  of  the  compasses  in  Fig. 20–8a.
There is a simple way to remember the direction of the magnetic field lines in this
case. It is called a right-hand rule: grasp the wire with your right hand so that your
thumb points in the direction of the conventional (positive) current; then your
fingers will encircle the wire in the direction of the magnetic field, Fig. 20–8d.

The magnetic field lines due to a circular loop of current-carrying wire can be
determined in a similar way by placing a compass at various locations near the
loop. The result is shown in Fig. 20–9. Again the right-hand rule can be used, as
shown in Fig. 20–10. Unlike the uniform field shown in Fig. 20–7, the magnetic
fields shown in Figs. 20–8 and 20–9 are not uniform—the fields are different in
magnitude and direction at different locations.

EXERCISE B A straight wire carries a current directly toward you. In what direction are
the magnetic field lines surrounding the wire?

FIGURE 20–10 Right-hand rule
for determining the direction of the
magnetic field relative to the current
in a loop of wire.

I

Magnetic
field

Right-Hand-Rule-1:
Magnetic field direction
produced by electric current

FIGURE 20–9 Magnetic field lines
due to a circular loop of wire.

I

SECTION 20–2 Electric Currents Produce Magnetic Fields

563

B
B

N

I

S

Force
is
down

+

–

22 V

I

(a)

Force is up

N

B
B

I

S

I

(b)

+–

22 V

B
I

B
F

B
B

(c) Right-hand rule

FIGURE 20–11 (a) Force on a
current-carrying wire placed in a
B
magnetic field
;
B
current reversed; (c) right-hand rule
for setup in (b), with current
shown as if a vector with direction.

(b) same, but

B
I

Right-Hand-Rule-2:
B
Force on current exerted by B

FIGURE 20–12 Current-carrying
wire in a magnetic field. Force on
the wire is directed into the page.
I

B
B

θ

l

564 CHAPTER 20

20–3 Force on an Electric Current in a
Magnetic Field; Definition of

B
B
In Section 20–2 we saw that an electric current exerts a force on a magnet, such as
a compass needle. By Newton’s third law, we might expect the reverse to be true
as well: we should expect that a magnet exerts a force on a current-carrying wire.
Experiments indeed confirm this effect, and it too was first observed by Oersted.
Suppose a straight wire is placed in the magnetic field between the poles of a
horseshoe magnet as shown in Fig. 20–11, where the vector symbol
represents
the magnitude and direction of the magnetic field. When a current flows in the wire,
experiment shows that a force is exerted on the wire. But this force is not toward
one or the other pole of the magnet. Instead, the force is directed at right angles
to the magnetic field direction, downward in Fig. 20–11a. If the current is reversed
in direction, the force is in the opposite direction, upward as shown in Fig. 20–11b.
Experiments  show  that  the  direction  of  the  force  is  always  perpendicular  to  the
B
.
B
direction of the current and also perpendicular to the direction of the magnetic field,
The direction of the force is given by another right-hand rule, as illustrated in
Fig. 20–11c. Orient your right hand until your outstretched fingers can point in
the direction of the conventional current I, and when you bend your fingers they
Then your outstretched thumb
point in the direction of the magnetic field lines,
will point in the direction of the force  on the wire.

B
.
B

B
B

B
F

This right-hand rule describes the direction of the force. What about the mag-
nitude of the force on the wire? It is found experimentally that the magnitude of
the  force  is  directly  proportional  to  the  current  I in  the  wire, to  the  magnetic
field B (assumed uniform), and to the length  of wire exposed to the magnetic
field. The force also depends on the angle  between the current direction and the
magnetic field (Fig. 20–12), being proportional to
Thus, the force on a wire
l
carrying a current I with length

sin u.
in a uniform magnetic field B is given by

u

l

F r IlB sin u.

When the current is perpendicular to the field lines
force is strongest. When the wire is parallel to the magnetic field lines
there is no force at all.

and

(u = 90°

sin 90° = 1),

the
(u = 0°),

Up to now we have not defined the magnetic field strength precisely. In fact,
the magnetic field B can be conveniently defined in terms of the above propor-
tion so that the proportionality constant is precisely 1. Thus we have

F = IlB sin u.

(20;1)

If the current’s direction is perpendicular to the field

B (u = 90°),
B

then the force is

Fmax = IlB.

B D
Ccurrent ⊥ B

(20;2)

(If B is not uniform, then B in Eqs. 20–1 and 20–2 can be the average field over
l
the length  of the wire.)
B
B

can be defined using Eq. 20–2 as
where
Fmax
is  the  magnitude  of  the  force  on  a  straight  length  of  wire  carrying  a
B
.
current I when the wire is perpendicular to B

B = Fmax(cid:2)Il,
l

The magnitude of

EXERCISE C A  wire  carrying  current  I is  perpendicular  to  a  magnetic  field  of
strength B. Assuming a fixed length of wire, which of the following changes will result in
decreasing the force on the wire by a factor of 2? (a) Decrease the angle from 90° to 45°;
I(cid:2)2;
(b) decrease  the  angle  from  90° to  30°; (c)  decrease  the  current  in  the  wire  to
(d) decrease the magnetic field to

(e) none of these will do it.

B(cid:2)2;

The SI unit for magnetic field B is the tesla (T). From Eq. 20–1 or 20–2, we see
1 T = 1 N(cid:2)A(cid:2)m.
An older name for the tesla is the “weber per meter squared”
that
A1 Wb(cid:2)m2 = 1 TB.
Another unit sometimes used to specify magnetic field is a cgs
1 G = 10–4 T.
unit, the gauss (G):
A field given in gauss should always be changed
to teslas before using with other SI units. To get a “feel” for these units, we note
0.5 * 10–4 T.
that the magnetic field of the Earth at its surface is about G or
On the other hand, strong electromagnets can produce fields on the order of 2 T
and superconducting magnets can produce over 10 T.

1
2

EXAMPLE 20;1
Magnetic force on a current-carrying wire. A wire carrying
l = 12 cm
a steady (dc) 30-A current has a length
between the pole faces of a
to the field (Fig. 20–13). The magnetic
u = 60°
magnet. The wire is at an angle
field is approximately uniform at 0.90 T. We ignore the field beyond the pole
pieces. Determine the magnitude and direction of the force on the wire.
F = IlB sin u.
APPROACH We use Eq. 20–1,
SOLUTION The force F on the 12-cm length of wire within the uniform field B
is

F = IlB sin u

= (30 A)(0.12 m)(0.90 T)(sin 60°) = 2.8 N.

We use right-hand-rule-2 to find the direction of  Hold your right hand flat,
pointing  your  fingers  in  the  direction  of  the  current. Then  bend  your  fingers
Fig. 20–13. Your
(maybe needing to rotate your hand) so they point along
thumb then points into the page, which is thus the direction of the force F.

B
B

,

B
.
F

EXERCISE D A straight power line carries 30 A and is perpendicular to the Earth’s mag-
What magnitude force is exerted on 100 m of this power line?
netic field of

0.50 * 10–4 T.

On a diagram, when we want to represent an electric current or a magnetic
*(cid:2)
,
is  meant  to  resemble  the  tip  of  an  arrow  pointing  directly
resembles the tail of an arrow pointing

field that is pointing out of the page (toward us) or into the page, we use  or
respectively. The
toward the reader, whereas the
away. See Fig. 20–14.

or

(cid:2)

z

*

B
B

(cid:2).

B
B
l = 10.0 cm

F = 3.48 * 10–2 N
What is the magnitude of the magnetic field B?

EXAMPLE 20;2
Measuring a magnetic field. A rectangular loop of wire
hangs vertically as shown in Fig. 20–14. A magnetic field
is directed horizontally,
perpendicular to the plane of the loop, and points out of the page as represented
by the symbol  The magnetic field
is very nearly uniform along the horizontal
) which is near the center of the gap of a
portion of wire ab (length
large magnet producing the field. The top portion of the wire loop is out of the
field. The loop hangs from a balance (reads 0 when
) which measures a
when the wire carries a current
downward magnetic force of
I = 0.245 A.
APPROACH Three straight sections of the wire loop are in the magnetic field:
a horizontal section and two vertical sections. We apply Eq. 20–1 to each sec-
tion and use the right-hand rule.
SOLUTION Using right-hand-rule-2 (page 564), we see that the magnetic force
on the left vertical section of wire points to the left, and the force on the vertical
section  on  the  right  points  to  the  right. These  two  forces  are  equal  and  in
opposite directions and so add up to zero. Hence, the net magnetic force on the
The
loop  is  that  on  the  horizontal  section  ab, whose  length  is
B
angle  between  and the wire is
B

l = 0.100 m.
Thus Eq. 20–1 gives

sin u = 1.

B = 0

so

u

B =

F
Il

=

u = 90°,
3.48 * 10–2 N
(0.245 A)(0.100 m)

= 1.42 T.

I

I

θ

 = 60°

B
B

B
B

l = 12 cm

FIGURE 20–13 Example 20–1. For
right-hand-rule-2, the thumb points
into the page. See Fig. 20–11c.

FIGURE 20–14 Measuring a
B
magnetic field  Example 20–2.
B
.

10.0 cm

I

I

B
   (toward viewer)
B

a

b

B
F

NOTE This technique can be a precise means of determining magnetic field strength.

SECTION 20–3 565

Right-hand rule

B
F

vB
+
q
–

vB
q

vB

B
B

B
F

B
B

N

S

B
F

FIGURE 20–15 Force on charged
particles due to a magnetic field is
perpendicular to the magnetic field
B
vB
F
direction. If
vertical. The right-hand rule is
shown for the force on a positive
charge, ±q.

is horizontal, then

is

Right-hand-rule-3:
Force on moving charge
B
exerted by B

FIGURE 20–16 Example 20–4.

vB
   (up)

+

B
F
(west)

+ Moving into
page (north)

(a)

(b)

20–4 Force on an Electric Charge
Moving in a Magnetic Field

We have seen that a current-carrying wire experiences a force when placed in a mag-
netic field. Since a current in a wire consists of moving electric charges, we might
expect that freely moving charged particles (not in a wire) would also experience a
force when passing through a magnetic field. Free electric charges are not as easy to
produce in the lab as a current in a wire, but it can be done, and experiments do
show that moving electric charges experience a force in a magnetic field.

t

B
.
B

From what we already know, we can predict the force on a single electric charge
If N such particles of charge q pass by a given point
moving in a magnetic field
I = Nq(cid:2)t.
t
We let  be the time for a charge q
in time  , they constitute a current
B
l = vt
l
v
to travel a distance
;
B
is the magnitude
of the velocity  of the particle. Thus, the force on these N particles is, by Eq. 20–1,
F = IlB sin u = (Nq(cid:2)t)(vt)B sin u = NqvB sin u.
The force on one of the N parti-
cles is then

in a magnetic field

where

then

vB

F = qvB sin u.

B D
Cu between vB and B

(20;3)

This equation gives the magnitude of the force exerted by a magnetic field on a
v
particle of charge q moving with velocity  at a point where the magnetic field
B
has magnitude B. The angle between  and
B
is  The force is greatest when the
(u = 90°):
particle moves perpendicular to

B
B

u.

vB

Fmax = qvB.

B D
CvB ⊥ B

(20;4)

(u = 0°).

The
The  force  is  zero if  the  particle  moves  parallel to  the  field  lines
vB
direction of the force is perpendicular to the magnetic field  and to the velocity
of  the  particle. For  a  positive  charge, the  force  direction  is  given  by  another
right-hand  rule: you  orient  your  right  hand  so  that  your  outstretched  fingers
(vB),
and when you bend your
point along the direction of the particle’s velocity
Then your thumb will point in
fingers they must point along the direction of
the direction of the force. This is true only for positively charged particles, and
will be “up” for the positive particle shown in Fig. 20–15. For negatively charged
particles, the force is in exactly the opposite direction, “down” in Fig. 20–15.

B
.
B

B
B

CONCEPTUAL EXAMPLE 20;3
tive charge
it feel a force? What if the charge were positive,

Negative charge near a magnet. A nega-
is placed at rest near a magnet. Will the charge begin to move? Will

±Q?

–Q

RESPONSE No  to  all  questions. A  charge  at  rest  has  velocity  equal  to  zero.
Magnetic fields exert a force only on moving electric charges (Eq. 20–3).

EXERCISE E Return to the Chapter-Opening Question, page 560, and answer it again
now. Try to explain why you may have answered differently the first time.

8.0 * 10–14 N
5.0 * 106 m(cid:2)s

EXAMPLE 20;4
Magnetic force on a proton. A magnetic field exerts a
force of
toward the west on a proton moving vertically upward at a
(Fig. 20–16a). When moving horizontally in a northerly
speed of
direction, the force on the proton is zero (Fig. 20–16b). Determine the magnitude
and direction of the magnetic field in this region. (The charge on a proton is
q = ±e = 1.6 * 10–19 C.
)
APPROACH Since the force on the proton is zero when moving north, the field
u = 0°
must be in a north–south direction (
in Eq. 20–3). To produce a force to
the west when the proton moves upward, right-hand-rule-3 tells us that  must
point toward the north. (Your thumb points west and the outstretched fingers
of  your  right  hand  point  upward  only  when  your  bent  fingers  point  north.)
The magnitude of
SOLUTION Equation 20–3 with

is found using Eq. 20–3.

B
B

B
B

u = 90°
gives
8.0 * 10–14 N
A1.6 * 10–19 CBA5.0 * 106 m(cid:2)sB

= 0.10 T.

566 CHAPTER 20 Magnetism

B =

F
qv

=

EXERCISE F Determine the force on the proton of Example 20–4 if it heads horizon-
tally south.

EXAMPLE 20;5 ESTIMATE
Magnetic force on ions during a nerve pulse.
Estimate the magnitude of the magnetic force due to the Earth’s magnetic field
on ions crossing a cell membrane during an action potential (Section 18–10).
Assume the speed of the ions is
APPROACH Using
B L 10–4 T,
SOLUTION
NOTE This is an extremely small force. Yet it is thought that migrating animals
do  somehow  detect  the  Earth’s  magnetic  field, and  this  is  an  area  of  active
research.

10–2 m(cid:2)s
.
set the magnetic field of the Earth to be roughly

q L e L 10–19 C.
and the charge
F L A10–19 CBA10–2 m(cid:2)sBA10–4 TB = 10–25 N.

F = qvB,

The path of a charged particle moving in a plane perpendicular to a uniform
magnetic field is a circle as we shall now show. In Fig. 20–17 the magnetic field is
directed into the paper, as represented by :’s. An electron at point P is moving to
the  right, and  the  force  on  it  at  this  point  is  toward  the  bottom  of  the  page  as
shown  (use  the  right-hand  rule  and  reverse  the  direction  for  negative  charge).
The  electron  is  thus  deflected  toward  the  page  bottom. A  moment  later, say,
when it reaches point Q, the force is still perpendicular to the velocity and is in
the  direction  shown. Because  the  force  is  always  perpendicular  to
the  mag-
nitude of  does not change—the electron moves at constant speed. We saw in
vB,
Chapter 5 that if the force on a particle is always perpendicular to its velocity
the  particle  moves  in  a  circle  and  has  a  centripetal  acceleration  of  magnitude
a = v2(cid:2)r
(Eq. 5–1). Thus  a  charged  particle  moves  in  a  circular  path  with  a
constant magnitude of centripetal acceleration in a uniform magnetic field (see
Fig. 20–18). The  electron  moves  clockwise  in  Fig. 20–17. A  positive  particle  in
this  field  would  feel  a  force  in  the  opposite  direction  and  would  thus  move
counterclockwise.

vB,

vB

P–

vB

Q
–

B
F

B
F

vB

Path of electron

B
B

is into the page

FIGURE 20–17 Force exerted by a
uniform magnetic field on a moving
charged particle (in this case, an
electron) produces a circular path.

FIGURE 20–18 The white ring inside
the glass tube is the glow of a beam
of electrons that ionize the gas
molecules. The red coils of current-
carrying wire produce a nearly
uniform magnetic field, illustrating
the circular path of charged particles
in a uniform magnetic field.

1.5 * 107 m(cid:2)s

Electron’s path in a uniform magnetic field. An electron
in a plane perpendicular to a uniform 0.010-T magnetic
very  small  in

EXAMPLE 20;6
travels at
field. Describe  its  path  quantitatively. Ignore  gravity  (
comparison).
APPROACH The electron moves at speed
a centripetal acceleration
using  Newton’s  second  law. The  force  is  given  by  Eq. 20–3  with
F = qvB.
SOLUTION We insert F and a into Newton’s second law:

in a curved path and so must have
(Eq. 5–1). We find the radius of curvature
sin u = 1:

a = v2(cid:2)r

=

v

©F = ma

qvB =

mv2
r

.

We solve for r and find
mv
qB

r =

.

B
F

vB,

the  magnitude  of  doesn’t  change. From  this
and the curve must

vB
r = constant,

then

is  perpendicular  to

Since
B = constant,
equation we see that if
B
be a circle as we claimed above. To get r we put in the numbers:
A9.1 * 10–31 kgBA1.5 * 107 m(cid:2)sB
A1.6 * 10–19 CB(0.010 T)

= 0.85 * 10–2 m = 8.5 mm.

r =

NOTE See Fig. 20–18. If the magnetic field B is larger, is the radius larger or
smaller?

SECTION 20–4 Force on an Electric Charge Moving in a Magnetic Field 567

The time T required for a particle of charge q moving with constant speed

make one circular revolution in a uniform magnetic field
2pr

is the circumference of its circular path. From Example 20–6,

is

r = mv(cid:2)qB,

B (⊥ vB)
B

T = 2pr(cid:2)v,

v
to
where
so

T = 2pm
qB

.

Since T is the period of rotation, the frequency of rotation is

f = 1
T

=

qB
2pm

.

(20;5)

This is often called the cyclotron frequency of a particle in a field because this is
the frequency at which particles revolve in a cyclotron (see Problem 88).

CONCEPTUAL EXAMPLE 20;7
charge q moving in an electric field
B = qE
F
a magnetic field be used to stop a charged particle?

Stopping charged particles. An electric
B
E
can be decelerated to a stop if the force
(Eq. 16–5) acts in the direction opposite to the charge’s velocity. Can

B

RESPONSE No, because  the  force  is  always  perpendicular to  the  velocity  of
the particle and thus can only change the direction but not the magnitude of its
velocity. Also the magnetic force cannot do work on the particle (force and dis-
placement are perpendicular, Eq. 6–1) and so cannot change the kinetic energy
of the particle, Eq. 6–4.

M
E
L
B
O
R
P

SOLV ING
Magnetic Fields
Magnetic fields are somewhat analogous to the electric
fields  of  Chapter  16, but  there  are  several  important
differences to recall:
1. The force experienced by a charged particle moving
in a magnetic field is perpendicular to the direction
of  the  magnetic  field  (and  to  the  direction  of  the
velocity of the particle), whereas the force exerted
by an electric field is parallel to the direction of the
field (and independent of the velocity of the particle).

2. The right-hand rule, in its different forms, is intended
to  help  you  determine  the  directions  of  magnetic
field, and the forces they exert, and/or the directions
of electric current or charged particle velocity. The
right-hand rules (Table 20–1) are designed to deal
with the “perpendicular” nature of these quantities.
3. The  equations  in  this  Chapter  are  generally  not
printed as vector equations, but involve magnitudes
only. Right-hand rules are to be used to find direc-
tions of vector quantities.

TABLE 20–1 Summary of Right-hand Rules ((cid:2) RHR)

Physical Situation

Example

How to Orient Right Hand

Result

Wrap fingers around wire
with thumb pointing in
direction of current I

Fingers curl in direction of

B
B

Fingers first point straight
along current I, then bend
along magnetic field

B
B

Thumb points in direction
B
of the force
F

Fingers point along particle’s  Thumb points in direction
velocity

of the force

then along

vB,

B

F

B

B

1. Magnetic field produced by

current
(RHR-1)

2. Force on electric current I
due to magnetic field
(RHR-2)

3. Force on electric charge
due to magnetic field
(RHR-3)

±q

I

B
F

B
B

B
F

I

B

B

B
I

vB

Fig. 20;8d

Fig. 20;11c

B
B

Fig. 20;15

568 CHAPTER 20 Magnetism

*

*

CONCEPTUAL EXAMPLE 20;8
A helical path. What is the path of a charged
particle in a uniform magnetic field if its velocity is not perpendicular to the
magnetic field?

RESPONSE The velocity vector can be broken down into components parallel
and perpendicular to the field. The velocity component parallel to the field lines
experiences no force
so this component remains constant. The velocity
component perpendicular to the field results in circular motion about the field
lines. Putting  these  two  motions  together  produces  a  helical  (spiral)  motion
around the field lines as shown in Fig. 20–19.

(u = 0),

EXERCISE G What is the sign of the charge in Fig. 20–19? How would you modify the
drawing if the charge had the opposite sign?

Aurora Borealis
Charged ions approach the Earth from the Sun (the “solar wind”) and enter the
atmosphere mainly near the poles, sometimes causing a phenomenon called the
aurora borealis or “northern lights” in northern latitudes. To see why, consider
Example  20–8  and  Fig. 20–20  (see  also  Fig. 20–19). In  Fig. 20–20  we  imagine
a stream  of  charged  particles  approaching  the  Earth. The  velocity  component
perpendicular to the field for each particle becomes a circular orbit around the
field lines, whereas the velocity component parallel to the field carries the particle
along the field lines toward the poles. As a particle approaches the Earth’s North
Pole, the  magnetic  field  is  stronger  and  the  radius  of  the  helical  path  becomes
smaller (see Example 20–6,

r r 1(cid:2)B

).

A high concentration of high-speed charged particles ionizes the air, and as
the  electrons  recombine  with  atoms, light  is  emitted  (Chapter  27)  which  is  the
aurora. Auroras are especially spectacular during periods of high sunspot activity
when more charged particles are emitted and more come toward Earth.

F = evdB,

The Hall Effect
When  a  current-carrying  conductor  is  held  fixed  in  a  magnetic  field, the  field
exerts a sideways force on the charges moving in the conductor. For example, if
electrons move to the right in the rectangular conductor shown in Fig. 20–21a,
the inward magnetic field will exert a downward force on the electrons of mag-
is  the  drift  velocity  of  the  electrons  (Section  18–8).
nitude
Thus  the  electrons  will  tend  to  move  nearer  to  side  D  than  side  C, causing  a
potential  difference  between  sides  C  and  D  of  the  conductor. This  potential
B
E
that  it  produces  exerts  a  force
difference builds  up  until  the  electric  field
H)
(=  eE
on the moving charges that is equal and opposite to the magnetic force
(=  evdB)
. This is the Hall effect, named after E. H. Hall who discovered it in 1879.
The  difference  of  potential  produced  is  called  the  Hall  emf. Its  magnitude  is
Hall = E
V

where d is the width of the conductor.

d = (F(cid:2)e)d = vdBd,
H

where

vd

H

B

A current of negative charges moving to the right is equivalent to positive
charges  moving  to  the  left, at  least  for  most  purposes. But  the  Hall  effect  can
distinguish these two. As can be seen in Fig. 20–21b, positive particles moving to
the left are deflected downward, so that the bottom surface is positive relative to
the top surface. This is the reverse of part (a). Indeed, the direction of the emf in the
Hall effect first revealed that it is negative particles that move in metal conductors,
and that positive “holes” move in p-type semiconductors.

Because  the  Hall  emf  is  proportional  to  B, the  Hall  effect  can  be  used  to
measure  magnetic  fields. A  device  to  do  so  is  called  a  Hall  probe. When  B is
known, the  Hall  emf  can  be  used  to  determine  the  drift  velocity  of  charge
carriers.

)vB

vB

B
B

vB

FIGURE 20–19 Example 20–8.

FIGURE 20–20 (a) Diagram showing
a charged particle that approaches
the Earth and is “captured” by the
magnetic field of the Earth. Such
particles follow the field lines toward
the poles as shown. (b) Photo of
aurora borealis.

Charged particle
approaching Earth

B
B

B
B

(a)

(b)

FIGURE 20–21 The Hall effect.
(a) Negative charges moving to the
right as the current. (b) Positive charges
moving to the left as the current.

C

+

+

+

+

+

B
E

+

H

d

–

–

–

–

–

–

D

C

–

(a)

–

–

–

–

–

–
B
E

H

+

d

+

+

+

+

+

+

(b)

D

SECTION 20–4 Force on an Electric Charge Moving in a Magnetic Field 569

I

20–5 Magnetic Field Due to a
Long Straight Wire

We  saw  in  Section  20–2, Fig. 20–8, that  the  magnetic  field  lines  due  to  the
electric  current  in  a  long  straight  wire  form  circles  with  the  wire  at  the  center
(Fig. 20–22). You  might  expect  that  the  field  strength  at  a  given  point  would
be  greater  if  the  current  flowing  in  the  wire  were  greater; and  that  the  field
would  be  less  at  points  farther  from  the  wire. This  is  indeed  the  case. Careful
experiments  show  that  the  magnetic  field  B due  to  the  current  in  a  long
straight  wire  is  directly  proportional  to  the  current  I in  the  wire  and  inversely
proportional to the distance r from the wire:

B r

I
r

.

FIGURE 20–22 Same as Fig. 20–8c,
magnetic field lines around a long
straight wire carrying an electric
current I.

FIGURE 20–23 Example 20–9.

I

P

10 cm

C A U T I O N
A compass, near a current,
may not point north

I
1

FIGURE 20–24 Example 20–10.
Wire 1 carrying current  out
towards us, and wire 2 carrying
current
magnetic fields whose lines are
circles around their respective wires.

into the page, produce

I
2

B2

B1

I1 (out)

I2 (in)

5.0 cm

5.0 cm

This relation is valid as long as r, the perpendicular distance to the wire, is much
less than the distance to the ends of the wire (i.e., the wire is long).

The proportionality constant is written as
I
r

B =

.

m
0
2p

m
0

(cid:2)2p

, so

[near a long straight wire]

(20;6)

The value of the constant
= 4p * 10–7 T(cid:2)m(cid:2)A.
m
0

m

0 ,

which is called the permeability of free space, is†

B
B

EXAMPLE 20;9
Calculation of  near a wire. An electric wire in the wall
of a building carries a dc current of 25 A vertically upward. What is the magnetic
field due to this current at a point P, 10 cm due north of the wire (Fig. 20–23)?
APPROACH We assume the wire is much longer than the 10-cm distance to the
point P so we can apply Eq. 20–6.
SOLUTION According to Eq. 20–6:

B =

m
I
0
2pr

=

A4p * 10–7 T(cid:2)m(cid:2)AB(25 A)
(2p)(0.10 m)

= 5.0 * 10–5 T,

or  0.50 G. By  right-hand-rule-1  (page  568), the  field  points  to  the  west  (into
the page in Fig. 20–23) at point P.
NOTE The magnetic field at point P produced by the wire has about the same
magnitude as Earth’s, so a compass at P would not point north but to the northwest.
NOTE Most electrical wiring in buildings consists of cables with two wires in each
cable. Since the two wires carry current in opposite directions, their magnetic
fields cancel to a large extent, but may still affect sensitive electronic devices.

I
2

I
1

= 7.0 A

= 5.0 A

is out of the page, and

EXAMPLE 20;10
Magnetic field midway between two currents. Two
parallel  straight  wires  10.0 cm  apart  carry  currents  in  opposite  directions
(Fig. 20–24). Current
is into the
page. Determine the magnitude and direction of the magnetic field halfway
between the two wires.
APPROACH The  magnitude  of  the  field  produced  by  each  wire  is  calculated
from Eq. 20–6. The direction of each wire’s field is determined with the right-
hand rule. The total field is the vector sum of the two fields at the midway point.
SOLUTION The magnetic field lines due to current
form circles around the
and right-hand-rule-1 (Fig. 20–8d) tells us they point counterclockwise
wire of
I
around  the  wire. The  field  lines  due  to
2
and point clockwise, Fig. 20–24. At the midpoint, both fields point upward in
Fig. 20–24 as shown, and so add together. The midpoint is 0.050 m from each wire.

form  circles  around  the  wire  of

I
1 ,

I
1

I
2

570 CHAPTER 20 Magnetism

†The constant is chosen in this complicated way so that Ampère’s law (Section 20–8), which is consid-
ered more fundamental, will have a simple and elegant form.

From Eq. 20–6 the magnitudes of

B
1

=

B
2

=

m
I
1
0
2pr
m
I
2
0
2pr

=

=

B
1

are

and

B
2
A4p * 10–7 T(cid:2)m(cid:2)AB(5.0 A)
2p(0.050 m)
A4p * 10–7 T(cid:2)m(cid:2)AB(7.0 A)
2p(0.050 m)

= 2.0 * 10–5 T;

= 2.8 * 10–5 T.

The total field is up with a magnitude of

B = B
1

+ B
2

= 4.8 * 10–5 T.

EXERCISE H Suppose both  and  point into the page in Fig. 20–24. What then is the
field B midway between the wires?

I
2

I
1

CONCEPTUAL EXAMPLE 20;11
Magnetic  field  due  to  four  wires.
Figure 20–25 shows four long parallel wires which carry equal currents into or
out of the page as shown. In which configuration, (a) or (b), is the magnetic field
greater at the center of the square?

RESPONSE It is greater in (a). The arrows illustrate the directions of the field
produced by each wire; check it out, using the right-hand rule to confirm these
results. The net field at the center is the superposition of the four fields (which
are of equal magnitude), which will point to the left in (a) and is zero in (b).

20–6 Force between Two Parallel Wires

We have seen that a wire carrying a current produces a magnetic field (magnitude
given  by  Eq. 20–6  for  a  long  straight  wire). Also, a  current-carrying  wire  feels
a force when placed in a magnetic field (Section 20–3, Eq. 20–1). Thus, we expect
that two current-carrying wires will exert a force on each other.

Consider two long parallel wires separated by a distance d, as in Fig. 20–26a.
I
2 ,
They carry currents  and
respectively. Each current produces a magnetic field
that is “felt” by the other, so each must exert a force on the other. For example,
in Fig 20–26 is given by Eq. 20–6, which at
the magnetic field
the location of wire 2 points into the page and has magnitude

produced by

B
1

I
1

I
1

.

=

F
2

B
1

I
1
d

exerted by

m
0
2p
See Fig. 20–26b, where the field due only to
I
is shown. According to Eq. 20–2, the
1
B
I
2 ,
has magnitude
on a length  of wire 2, carrying current
force
1
= I
2
I
Note that the force on
2
produces a field, but it does not exert a force on itself. We substitute
formula for

is due only to the field produced by  Of course,

and find that the force on a length  of wire 2 is

I
also
2
into the

I
1 .

B
1

B
1

F
2

2 .

l

l

l

2

F
2

2

F
2

=

m
0
2p

I
I
1
2
d

l
2 .

[parallel wires] (20;7)

I
2

B
1

If we use right-hand-rule-1 of Fig. 20–8d, we see that the lines of
are as shown
in Fig. 20–26b. Then using right-hand-rule-2 of Fig. 20–11c, we see that the force
exerted on  will be to the left in Fig. 20–26b. That is,
exerts an attractive force
(Fig. 20–27a). This is true as long as the currents are in the same direction.
I
on
2
I
is in the opposite direction from
right-hand-rule-2 indicates that the force
If
2
(Fig. 20–27b).
I
is in the opposite direction. That is,
1
I
Reasoning similar to that above shows that the magnetic field produced by
2
I
exerts  an  equal  but  opposite  force  on  We  expect  this  to  be  true  also  from
1 .
Newton’s third law. Thus, as shown in Fig. 20–27, parallel currents in the same
direction attract each other, whereas parallel currents in opposite directions repel.

I
1,
I
exerts a repulsive force on
2

I
1

1

3

2
1

3

4

2

4

1

3

3

4

1

2

2

4

(a)

(b)
FIGURE 20–25 Example 20–11.

I1

I2

I1

I2

d

Wire 1 Wire 2
(a)

(b)

FIGURE 20–26 (a) Two parallel
I
I
conductors carrying currents  and
2 .
1
B
I
produced by
(b) Magnetic field
B
1 .
1
I
(Field produced by
is not shown.)
2
B
points into page at position of I
B
2 .
1

FIGURE 20–27 (a) Parallel currents in
the same direction exert an attractive
force on each other. (b) Antiparallel
currents (in opposite directions) exert
a repulsive force on each other.

I1

I2

I1

I2

F

F

F

F

(a)

(b)

SECTION 20–6 Force between Two Parallel Wires

571

EXAMPLE 20;12
Force between two current-carrying wires. The two wires
of a 2.0-m-long appliance cord are 3.0 mm apart and carry a current of 8.0 A.
Calculate the force one wire exerts on the other.
APPROACH Each wire is in the magnetic field of the other when the current is
on, so we can apply Eq. 20–7.
SOLUTION Equation 20–7 gives
I
I
2
1
d

A4p * 10–7 T(cid:2)m(cid:2)AB(8.0 A)2(2.0 m)
(2p)A3.0 * 10–3 mB

= 8.5 * 10–3 N.

m
0
2p

F =

=

l

2

The currents are in opposite directions (one toward the appliance, the other away
from it), so the force would be repulsive and tend to spread the wires apart.

Definition of the Ampere and the Coulomb
in  Eq. 20–6  could  be  exactly
You  may  have  wondered  how  the  constant
4p * 10–7 T(cid:2)m(cid:2)A.
Here  is  how  it  happened. With  an  older  definition  of  the
m
ampere,
was measured experimentally to be very close to this value. Today,
0
m
This could not be done if the ampere
0
were defined independently. The ampere, the unit of current, is now defined in
terms of the magnetic field it produces using the defined value of

4p * 10–7 T(cid:2)m(cid:2)A.

is defined to be exactly

m
0

m

0 .

In particular, we use the force between two parallel current-carrying wires,
exactly, and the two

= 1 A

= I
2

Eq. 20–7, to define the ampere precisely. If
wires are exactly 1 m apart, then
m
0
2p

A4p * 10–7 T(cid:2)m(cid:2)AB
(2p)

I
I
2
1
d

F
l

I
1

=

=

(1 A)(1 A)
(1 m)

= 2 * 10–7 N(cid:2)m.

Thus, one ampere is defined as that current flowing in each of two long parallel wires,
per meter of length of each wire.
1 m apart, which results in a force of exactly
This is the precise definition of the ampere, and because it is readily repro-
ducible, is called an operational definition. The coulomb is defined in terms of
the ampere as being exactly one ampere-second: 1 C = 1 A(cid:2)s.

2 * 10–7 N

P H Y S I C S   A P P L I E D
Solenoids and electromagnets

20–7 Solenoids and Electromagnets

I

I

S

(a)

l

N

A long coil of wire consisting of many loops (or turns) of wire is called a solenoid.
The current in each loop produces a magnetic field, as we saw in Fig. 20–9. The
magnetic field within a solenoid can be fairly large because it is the sum of the fields
due to the current in each loop (Fig. 20–28). A solenoid acts like a magnet; one end
can be considered the north pole and the other the south pole, depending on the direc-
tion of the current in the loops (use the right-hand rule). Since the magnetic field
lines leave the north pole of a magnet, the north pole of the solenoid in Fig. 20–28 is
on the right. As we will see in the next Section, the magnetic field inside a tightly
wrapped solenoid with N turns of wire in a length  each carrying current I, is

l,

B =

m
0

NI
l

.

(20;8)

If a piece of iron is placed inside a solenoid, the magnetic field is increased
greatly because the iron becomes a magnet. The resulting magnetic field is the sum
of the field due to the current and the field due to the iron, and can be hundreds or
thousands of times the field due to the current alone (see Section 20–12). Such an
iron-core solenoid is an electromagnet.

Electromagnets  have  many  practical  applications, from  use  in  motors  and
generators  to  producing  large  magnetic  fields  for  research. Sometimes  an  iron
core is not present—the magnetic field then comes only from the current in the
wire coils. A large field B in this case requires a large current I, which produces a
large amount of waste heat
But if the current-carrying wires are made
of superconducting material kept below the transition temperature (Section 18–9),
very  high  fields  can  be  produced, and  no  electric  power  is  needed  to  maintain
the large current in the superconducting coils. Energy is required, however, to
refrigerate the coils at the low temperatures where they superconduct.

AP = I2RB.

(b)
FIGURE 20–28 (a) Magnetic field
of a solenoid. The north pole of this
solenoid, thought of as a magnet, is
on the right, and the south pole is on
the left. (b) Photo of iron filings
B
B
aligning along
field lines of a
solenoid with loosely spaced loops.
The field is smoother if the loops are
closely spaced.

572 CHAPTER 20

Another  useful  device  consists  of  a  solenoid  into  which  a  rod  of  iron  is
partially inserted. This combination is also referred to as a solenoid. One simple
use is as a doorbell (Fig. 20–29). When the circuit is closed by pushing the button,
the coil effectively becomes a magnet and exerts a force on the iron rod. The rod
is pulled into the coil and strikes the bell. A large solenoid is used for the starter
of a car: when you engage the starter, you are closing a circuit that not only turns
the starter motor, but first activates a solenoid that moves the starter into direct
contact with the gears on the engine’s flywheel. Solenoids are used a lot as switches
in cars and many other devices. They have the advantage of moving mechanical
parts quickly and accurately.
Magnetic Circuit Breakers
Modern circuit breakers that protect houses and buildings from overload and fire
contain not only a “thermal” part (bimetallic strip as described in Section 18–6,
Fig. 18–19) but also a magnetic sensor. If the current is above a certain level, the
magnetic field the current produces pulls an iron plate that breaks the same contact
(6 10 ms),
points as in Figs. 18–19b and c. Magnetic circuit breakers react quickly
and for buildings are designed to react to the high currents of short circuits (but
not shut off for the start-up surges of motors).

In  more  sophisticated  circuit  breakers, including  ground  fault  circuit  inter-
rupters (GFCIs—discussed in Section 21–9), a solenoid is used. The iron rod of
Fig. 20–29, instead of striking a bell, strikes one side of a pair of electric contact
(L 1 ms)
points, opening them and opening the circuit. They react very quickly
and to very small currents
and thus protect humans (not just property)
and save lives.

(L 5 mA)

20–8 Ampère’s Law

P H Y S I C S   A P P L I E D

Doorbell, car starter

Iron rod

Bell

Spring

Switch

Voltage

I

Voltage

FIGURE 20–29 Solenoid used as a
doorbell.

P H Y S I C S   A P P L I E D

Magnetic circuit breakers

The relation between the current in a long straight wire and the magnetic field it
produces is given by Eq. 20–6, Section 20–5. This equation is valid only for a long
straight  wire. Is  there  a  general  relation  between  a  current  in  a  wire  of  any
shape and the magnetic field around it? Yes: the French scientist André Marie
Ampère (1775–1836) proposed such a relation shortly after Oersted’s discovery.
Consider any (arbitrary) closed path around a current, as shown in Fig. 20–30, and
imagine  this  path  as  being  made  up  of  short  segments  each  of  length  We
take the product of the length of each segment times the component of magnetic
field  parallel to that segment. If we now sum all these terms, the result (accord-
ing to Ampère) will be equal to
that passes through
the surface enclosed by the path. This is known as Ampère’s law and can be written
(20;9)
©
B
The symbol  means “the sum of” and  means the component of  parallel to
||
that particular
is essen-
tially constant along each length. The sum must be made over a closed path, and
Iencl

B
B
are chosen small enough so that
||

is the total net current enclosed by this closed path.

times the net current

¢l = m
0

The lengths

Iencl .

©B
||

Iencl

¢l.

¢l.

m
0

¢l

B
B

B

AMPÈRE’S LAW

I1

I2

Closed path
made up of
segments of
length Δl

Area enclosed
by the path

I1

I2

FIGURE 20–30 Arbitrary path
enclosing electric currents, for
Ampère’s law. The path is broken
down into segments of equal length
The total current enclosed by the
path shown is Iencl = I
1

+ I

2 .

¢l.

SECTION 20–8 Ampère’s Law 573

r

P

I

I

FIGURE 20–31 Circular path of
radius r.

Field Due to a Straight Wire
We can check Ampère’s law by applying it to the simple case of a long straight
wire carrying a current I. Let us find the magnitude of B at point P, a distance r
from the wire in Fig. 20–31. The magnetic field lines are circles with the wire at
their center (as in Fig. 20–8). As the path to be used in Eq. 20–9, we choose a
convenient one: a circle of radius r, because at any point on this path, will be
tangent to this circle. For any short segment of the circle (Fig. 20–31), will be
parallel to that segment, so
Suppose we break the circular path down
into 100 segments.† Then Ampère’s law states that

= B.

B
B
B
B

B
||

(B ¢l)
1

+ (B ¢l)
2

+ (B ¢l)
3

+ p + (B ¢l)

100

= m
0

I.

The dots represent all the terms we did not write down. All the segments are the
same distance from the wire, so by symmetry we expect B to be the same at each
segment. We can then factor out B from the sum:
+ ¢l

+ p + ¢l

B = m
0

I.

100

BA¢l
1

equals the circumference of the circle,

2pr.

Thus

2

+ ¢l
3
¢l

The sum of the segment lengths
we have

B(2pr) = m
0

I,

or

B =

I
m
0
2pr

.

This is just Eq. 20–6 for the magnetic field near a long straight wire, so Ampère’s
law agrees with experiment in this case.

A  great  many  experiments  indicate  that Ampère’s  law  is  valid  in  general.
Practically, it  can  be  used  to  calculate  the  magnetic  field  mainly  for  simple  or
symmetric  situations. Its  importance  is  that  it  relates  the  magnetic  field  to  the
current in a direct and mathematically elegant way. Ampère’s law is considered
one  of  the  basic  laws  of  electricity  and  magnetism. It  is  valid  for  any  situation
where the currents and fields are not changing in time.

Field Inside a Solenoid
We  now  use  Ampère’s  law  to  calculate  the  magnetic  field  inside  a  solenoid
(Section  20–7), a  long  coil  of  wire  with  many  loops  or  turns, Fig. 20–32. Each
loop  produces  a  magnetic  field  as  was  shown  in  Fig. 20–9, and  the  total  field
inside the solenoid will be the sum of the fields due to each current loop as shown
in Fig. 20–32a for a few loops. If the solenoid has many loops and they are close
together, the field inside will be nearly uniform and parallel to the solenoid axis
except at the ends, as shown in Fig. 20–32b. Outside the solenoid, the field lines
spread out in space, so the magnetic field is much weaker than inside. For apply-
ing Ampère’s law, we choose the path abcd shown in Fig. 20–33 far from either
end. We consider this path as made up of four straight segments, the sides of the
rectangle: ab, bc, cd, da. Then Ampère’s law, Eq. 20–9, becomes

AB
||

¢lBab + AB
||

¢lBbc + AB
||

¢lBcd + AB
||

¢lBda = m
0

Iencl .

The  first  term  in  the  sum  on  the  left  will  be  (nearly)  zero  because  the
field outside the solenoid is negligible compared to the field inside. Furthermore,
B
B
is  perpendicular  to  the  segments  bc  and  da, so  these  terms  are  zero, too.

†Actually, Ampère’s law is precisely accurate when there is an infinite number of infinitesimally short
segments, but that leads into calculus.

FIGURE 20–32 (a) Magnetic field
due to several loops of a solenoid.
(b) For many closely spaced loops,
the field is very nearly uniform.

B
B

I

B
B

B
B

(a)

(b)

FIGURE 20–33 Cross-sectional view into a
solenoid. The magnetic field inside is straight
except at the ends. Red dashed lines indicate
the path chosen for use in Ampère’s law.
(cid:2)
and  are electric current direction (in the
wire loops) out of the page and into the page.

z

574 CHAPTER 20 Magnetism

c

b

B
B

l

d

a

Current
out of
page

Current
into
page

¢lBcd = Bl,
Thus the left side of our Ampère equation we just wrote becomes
Bl
equal to
where B is the field inside the solenoid, and
m
times the current enclosed by our chosen rectangular loop: if a current I flows
0
in  the  wire  of  the  solenoid, the  total  current  enclosed  by  our  path  abcd  is  NI,
where N is the number of loops (or turns) our path encircles (five in Fig. 20–33).
Thus Ampère’s law gives us

AB
||
is the length cd. We set

l

so

Bl = m

0 NI,

B =

m

0 IN
l

,

[solenoid]

(20;8 again)

as we quoted in the previous Section. This is the magnetic field magnitude inside
a solenoid. B depends only on the number of loops per unit length,
and the
current I. The field does not depend on the position within the solenoid, so B is
uniform inside the solenoid. This is strictly true only for an infinite solenoid, but
it is a good approximation for real ones at points not close to the ends.

N(cid:2)l,

The direction of the magnetic field inside the solenoid is found by applying
right-hand-rule-1, Fig. 20–8d (see also Figs. 20–9 and 20–10), and is as shown in
Fig. 20–33.

20–9 Torque on a Current Loop;
Magnetic Moment

B
B

When  an  electric  current  flows  in  a  closed  loop  of  wire  placed  in  an  external
magnetic  field, as  shown  in  Fig. 20–34, the  magnetic  force  on  the  current  can
produce a torque. This is the principle behind a number of important practical
devices, including motors and analog voltmeters and ammeters, which we discuss
in the next Section.

B
B
.

B
F
2

B
F
1

and

sin u = 0

Current  flows  through  the  rectangular  loop  in  Fig. 20–34a, whose  face  we
exerts  no  force  and  no  torque  on  the  horizontal
assume  is  parallel  to
in Eq. 20–1.
segments of wire because they are parallel to the field and
But the magnetic field does exert a force on each of the vertical sections of wire
(see  also  top  view, Fig. 20–34b). By  right-hand-rule-2
as  shown,
(Fig. 20–11c or Table 20–1) the direction of the force on the upward current on
the  left  is  in  the  opposite  direction  from  the  equal  magnitude  force
on  the
downward current on the right. These forces give rise to a net torque that acts to
rotate the coil about its vertical axis.

Let us calculate the magnitude of this torque. From Eq. 20–2

the force
The lever arm for each force is
is at the midpoint. The torques around this axis produced by
t
same direction (Fig. 20–34b), so the total torque
b

B B,
Acurrent ⊥ B
where a is the length of the vertical arm of the coil (Fig. 20–34a).
where b is the width of the coil and the “axis”
act in the
and
is the sum of the two torques:

F = IaB,

b(cid:2)2,

B
F
2

B
F
2

B
F
1

b

t = IaB

+ IaB

= IabB = IAB,

2

2

is the area of the coil. If the coil consists of N loops of wire, the

A = ab

where
current is then NI, so the torque becomes
t = NIAB.

If the coil makes an angle with the magnetic field, as shown in Fig. 20–34c, the
1
Note
to
forces  are  unchanged, but  each  lever  arm  is  reduced  from
2
B
B
that the angle
and the perpendicular to the
face of the coil, Fig. 20–34c. So the torque becomes

is taken to be the angle between

b sin u.

b

u

1
2

(20;10)
This formula, derived here for a rectangular coil, is valid for any shape of flat coil.

t = NIAB sin u.

The quantity NIA is called the magnetic dipole moment of the coil:

M = NIA

(20;11)

and is considered a vector perpendicular to the coil.

Axis of rotation

B
B

B
B
B

B
F
   1

I

I

B
F
   1

I

B
F
   1

I

b

a

(a)

Axis
I

(b)

B
F
   2

I

I

I

B
F
   2

  M = NIA
(   to coil face)

θ

B
B

Axis

I

I

B
F
   2

(c)

B
.
B

FIGURE 20–34 Calculating the
torque on a current loop in a
magnetic field
parallel to
(c) loop makes an angle to
reducing the torque since the lever
arm is reduced.

(a) Loop face
field lines; (b) top view;

B
B

B
B

,

SECTION 20–9 Torque on a Current Loop; Magnetic Moment

575

EXAMPLE 20;13
Torque on a coil. A circular loop of wire has a diameter of
20.0 cm and contains 10 loops. The current in each loop is 3.00 A, and the coil is
placed in a 2.00-T external magnetic field. Determine the maximum and mini-
mum torque exerted on the coil by the field.
APPROACH Equation 20–10 is valid for any shape of coil, including circular
loops. Maximum and minimum torque are determined by the angle
the coil
makes with the magnetic field.
SOLUTION The area of one loop of the coil is

u

A = pr2 = p(0.100 m)2 = 3.14 * 10–2 m2.

The  maximum  torque  occurs  when  the  coil’s  face  is  parallel  to  the  magnetic
field, so

in Fig. 20–34c, and

in Eq. 20–10:

sin u = 1

u = 90°

t = NIAB sin u = (10)(3.00 A)A3.14 * 10–2 m2B(2.00 T)(1) = 1.88 N(cid:2)m.

The minimum torque occurs if
Eq. 20–10.
NOTE If the coil is free to turn, it will rotate toward the orientation with  u = 0°.

for which

and then

from

sin u = 0,

u = 0°,

t = 0

20–10 Applications: Motors,

Loudspeakers, Galvanometers
There are many practical applications of the forces related to magnetism. Among
the most common are motors and loudspeakers. First we look at the galvanometer,
which is the easiest to explain, and which you find on the instrument panels of
automobiles and other devices whose readout is via a pointer or needle.

Galvanometer
The basic component of analog meters (those with pointer and dial), including
analog  ammeters, voltmeters, and  ohmmeters, including  gauges  on  car  dash-
boards, is a galvanometer. We have already seen how these meters are designed
(Section 19–8), and now we can examine how the crucial element, a galvanometer,
works. As  shown  in  Fig. 20–35, a  galvanometer consists  of  a  coil  of  wire  (with
attached pointer) suspended in the magnetic field of a permanent magnet. When
current flows through the loop of wire, the magnetic field B exerts a torque  on
the loop, as given by Eq. 20–10,
t = NIAB sin u.

t

This  torque  is  opposed  by  a  spring  which  exerts  a  torque
proportional to the angle

through which it is turned (Hooke’s law). That is,

f

ts

approximately

0

1

2

Pivot

3

4

B
F

N

b

a

Spring

S

B
F

I

Pivot

I

ts = kf,

FIGURE 20–35 Galvanometer.

FIGURE 20–36 Galvanometer coil
(3 loops shown) wrapped on an iron
core.

B
F

N

Pointer

B
B

S

B
F

Iron core

576 CHAPTER 20 Magnetism

where k is  the  stiffness  constant  of  the  spring. The  coil  and  attached  pointer
rotate to the angle where the torques balance. When the needle is in equilibrium
at rest, the torques have equal magnitude:
f = NIAB sin u

kf = NIAB sin u,

so

.

k

f,

u

f

the coil makes with

is directly proportional to the current I flowing
The deflection of the pointer,
For a useful
in the coil, but also depends on the angle
meter we need
to depend only on the current I, independent of  To solve this
problem, magnets with curved pole pieces are used and the galvanometer coil is
wrapped around a cylindrical iron core as shown in Fig. 20–36. The iron tends to
concentrate the magnetic field lines so that  always points parallel to the face of
the coil at the wire outside the core. The force is then always perpendicular to the
face of the coil, and the torque will not vary with angle. Thus  will be propor-
tional to I, as required for a useful meter.

B
.
B
u.

B
B

f

Electric Motors
An electric  motor changes  electric  energy  into  (rotational)  mechanical  energy.
A motor works on the same principle as a galvanometer (a torque is exerted on a
current-carrying loop in a magnetic field) except that the coil must turn continu-
ously in one direction. The coil is mounted on an iron cylinder called the rotor or
armature, Fig. 20–37. Actually, there are several coils, although only one is indicated
in Fig. 20–37. The armature is mounted on a shaft or axle. When the armature
is  in  the  position  shown  in  Fig. 20–37, the  magnetic  field  exerts  forces  on  the
current in the loop as shown (perpendicular to
and to the current direction).
However, when the coil, which is rotating clockwise in Fig. 20–37, passes beyond
the vertical position, the forces would then act to return the coil back toward the
vertical if the current remained the same. But if the current could be reversed at
that critical moment, the forces would reverse, and the coil would continue rotating
in the same direction. Thus, alternation of the current is necessary if a motor is to
turn continuously in one direction. This can be achieved in a dc motor with the use
of commutators and brushes: as shown in Fig. 20–38, input current passes through
stationary brushes that rub against the conducting commutators mounted on the
motor shaft. At every half revolution, each commutator changes its connection
over to the other brush. Thus the current in the coil reverses every half revolution
as required for continuous rotation.

B
B

P H Y S I C S   A P P L I E D

DC motor

Armature

B
F

I

N

S

B
F

Brushes

+
–
Voltage source

FIGURE 20–37 Diagram of a simple
dc motor. (Magnetic field lines are
as shown in Fig. 20–36.)

Lead wires to armature coil

Commutator

Brushes

Battery (dc)

FIGURE 20–38 Commutator-brush
arrangement in a dc motor ensures
alternation of the current in the
armature to keep rotation continuous
in one direction. The commutators are
attached to the motor shaft and turn
with it, whereas the brushes remain
stationary.

Most motors contain several coils, called windings, each connected to a different
portion of the armature, Fig. 20–39. Current flows through each coil only during a
small part of a revolution, at the time when its orientation results in the maximum
torque. In this way, a motor produces a much steadier torque than can be obtained
from a single coil.

An ac motor, with ac current as input, can work without commutators since the
current itself alternates. Many motors use wire coils to produce the magnetic field
(electromagnets) instead of a permanent magnet. Indeed the design of most motors
is more complex than described here, but the general principles remain the same.
Loudspeakers and Headsets
Loudspeakers and audio headsets also work on the principle that a magnet exerts
a force on a current-carrying wire. The electrical output of a stereo or TV set is
connected  to  the  wire  leads  of  the  speaker  or  earbuds. The  speaker  leads  are
connected internally to a coil of wire, which is itself attached to the speaker cone,
Fig. 20–40. The  speaker  cone  is  usually  made  of  stiffened  cardboard  and  is
mounted so that it can move back and forth freely (except at its attachment on
the outer edges). A permanent magnet is mounted directly in line with the coil of
wire. When the alternating current of an audio signal flows through the wire coil,
which is free to move within the magnet, the coil experiences a force due to the
magnetic field of the magnet. (The force is to the right at the instant shown in
Fig. 20–40, RHR-2, page 568.) As the current alternates at the frequency of the
audio signal, the coil and attached speaker cone move back and forth at the same
frequency, causing  alternate  compressions  and  rarefactions  of  the  adjacent  air,
and  sound  waves  are  produced. A  speaker  thus  changes  electrical  energy  into
sound energy, and the frequencies and intensities of the emitted sound waves can
be an accurate reproduction of the electrical input.

FIGURE 20–39 Motor with many
windings.

P H Y S I C S   A P P L I E D

AC motor

FIGURE 20–40 Loudspeaker.

Rigid
metal
frame

Coil of wire
(attached to
speaker cone)

B
B

B
B

S

N

S

Magnet

I

I

Lead-in
       wires

Cone

SECTION 20–10 Applications: Motors, Loudspeakers, Galvanometers

577

P H Y S I C S   A P P L I E D
The mass spectrometer

S1

–

+

B
B
B
and
B
E

Sample

S2

2r

B'B

Detector
or film

FIGURE 20–41 Bainbridge-type
mass spectrometer. The magnetic
B¿
fields B and
paper (indicated by the dots).

point out of the

*

20–11 Mass Spectrometer

A mass spectrometer is a device to measure masses of atoms. It is used today not
only in physics but also in chemistry, geology, and medicine, often to identify atoms
(and their concentration) in given samples. Ions are produced by heating the sam-
ple, or by using an electric current. As shown in Fig. 20–41, the ions (mass m,
)  where  there  are
charge q)  pass  through  slit
and  enter  a  region  (before
crossed
electric and magnetic fields. Ions follow a straight-line path in this
region if the electric force qE (upward on a positive ion) is just balanced by the
(downward on a positive ion): that is, if
magnetic force

qE = qvB,

qvB

(⊥)

S1

S2

or

v =

E
B

.

v = E(cid:2)B

S2 .

will  pass  through  undeflected  and
Only  those  ions  whose  speed  is
(This arrangement is called a velocity selector.) In the
emerge through slit
S2 ,
semicircular region, after
so the ions follow
a circular path. The radius of the circular path is found from their mark on film,
is fixed. If instead r is fixed by the position of a detector,
or by detectors, if
applied to
then
an ion moving in a circle under the influence only of the magnetic field
gives
qvB¿ = mv2(cid:2)r.

is varied until detection occurs. Newton’s second law,

there is only a magnetic field,

©F = ma,

v = E(cid:2)B,

we have

Since

B¿,

B¿

B¿

B¿

m =

qB¿r
v

=

qBB¿r
E

.

(20;12)

All the quantities on the right side are known or can be measured, and thus m can
be determined.

Historically, the masses of many atoms were measured this way. When a pure
substance  was  used, it  was  sometimes  found  that  two  or  more  closely  spaced
marks would appear on the film. For example, neon produced two marks whose
radii corresponded to atoms of 20 and 22 atomic mass units (u). Impurities were
ruled out and it was concluded that there must be two types of neon with differ-
ent masses. These different forms were called isotopes. It was soon found that most
elements are mixtures of isotopes, and the difference in mass is due to different
numbers of neutrons (discussed in Chapter 30).

EXAMPLE 20;14
Mass spectrometry. Carbon atoms of atomic mass 12.0 u
are found to be mixed with an unknown element. In a mass spectrometer with
fixed
the carbon traverses a path of radius 22.4 cm and the unknown’s path has
a 26.2-cm radius. What is the unknown element? Assume the ions of both elements
have the same charge.

B¿,

APPROACH The  carbon  and  unknown  atoms  pass  through  the  same  electric
and magnetic fields. Hence their masses are proportional to the radius of their
respective paths (see Eq. 20–12).
SOLUTION We write a ratio for the masses, using Eq. 20–12:

m
x
mC

=

qBB¿r
(cid:2)E
x
qBB¿rC(cid:2)E

=

r
x
r
C

= 26.2 cm
22.4 cm

= 1.17.

m

= 1.17 * 12.0 u = 14.0 u.
Thus
(see the Periodic Table, inside the back cover).

x

The  other  element  is  probably  nitrogen

NOTE The  unknown  could  also  be  an  isotope  such  as  carbon-14
Appendix B. Further physical or chemical analysis would be needed.

A

14CB.
6

See

578 CHAPTER 20 Magnetism

*

20–12 Ferromagnetism:

Domains and Hysteresis

We saw in Section 20–1 that iron (and a few other materials) can be made into
strong magnets. These materials are said to be ferromagnetic.

*

Sources of Ferromagnetism
Microscopic examination reveals that a piece of iron is made up of tiny regions
known as domains, less than 1 mm in length or width. Each domain behaves like
a tiny magnet with a north and a south pole. In an unmagnetized piece of iron,
the  domains  are  arranged  randomly, Fig. 20–42a. The  magnetic  effects  of  the
domains cancel each other out, so this piece of iron is not a magnet. In a magnet,
the domains are preferentially aligned in one direction as shown in Fig. 20–42b
(downward in this case). A magnet can be made from an unmagnetized piece of
iron by placing it in a strong magnetic field. (You can make a needle magnetic,
for example, by stroking it with one pole of a strong magnet.) The magnetization
direction of domains may actually rotate slightly to be more nearly parallel to the
external field, and the borders of domains may move so domains with magnetic
orientation parallel to the external field grow larger (compare Figs. 20–42a and b).
We can now explain how a magnet can pick up unmagnetized pieces of iron
like paper clips. The magnet’s field causes a slight realignment of the domains in
the unmagnetized object so that it becomes a temporary magnet with its north pole
facing the south pole of the permanent magnet; thus, attraction results. Similarly,
elongated iron filings in a magnetic field acquire aligned domains and align them-
selves to reveal the shape of the magnetic field, Fig. 20–43.

An iron magnet can remain magnetized for a long time, and is referred to as
a “permanent magnet.” But if you drop a magnet on the floor or strike it with a
hammer, you can jar the domains into randomness and the magnet loses some or
all of its magnetism. Heating a permanent magnet can also cause loss of magnetism,
for raising the temperature increases the random thermal motion of atoms, which
tends  to  randomize  the  domains. Above  a  certain  temperature  known  as  the
Curie temperature (1043 K for iron), a magnet cannot be made at all.

The striking similarity between the fields produced by a bar magnet and by
a  loop  of  electric  current  (Figs. 20–4b, 20–9)  offers  a  clue  that  perhaps  magnetic
fields produced by electric currents may have something to do with ferromagnetism.
According to modern atomic theory, atoms can be roughly visualized as having
electrons that orbit around a central nucleus. The electrons are charged, and so
constitute  an  electric  current  and  therefore  produce  a  magnetic  field. But  the
fields due to orbiting electrons end up adding to zero. Electrons themselves pro-
duce an additional magnetic field, almost as if they and their electric charge were
spinning about their own axes. And it is this magnetic field due to electron spin†
that is believed to produce ferromagnetism in most ferromagnetic materials.

It is believed today that all magnetic fields are caused by electric currents.
This  means  that  magnetic  field  lines  always  form  closed  loops, unlike  electric
field lines which begin on positive charges and end on negative charges.

*

Magnetic Permeability
If  a  piece  of  ferromagnetic  material  like  iron  is  placed  inside  a  solenoid  to
form an electromagnet (Section 20–7), the magnetic field increases greatly over
that  produced  by  the  current  in  the  solenoid  coils  alone, often  by  hundreds
or  thousands  of  times. This  happens  because  the  domains  in  the  iron  become
aligned  by  the  external  field  produced  by  the  current  in  the  solenoid  coil.

†The name “spin” comes from an early suggestion that this intrinsic magnetic field arises from the
electron “spinning” on its axis (as well as “orbiting” the nucleus) to produce the extra field. However,
this view of a spinning electron is oversimplified and not valid (see Chapter 28).

(a)

(b)

FIGURE 20–42 (a) An unmagnetized
piece of iron is made up of domains
that are randomly arranged. Each
domain is like a tiny magnet; the
arrows represent the magnetization
direction, with the arrowhead being
the N pole. (b) In a magnet, the
domains are preferentially aligned in
one direction (down in this case),
and may be altered in size by the
magnetization process.

FIGURE 20–43 Iron filings line up
along magnetic field lines due to a
permanent magnet.

C A U T I O N
B
BB
E

lines form closed loops,
lines start on

(cid:4)

and end on (cid:3)

*SECTION 20–12 Ferromagnetism: Domains and Hysteresis

579

The total magnetic field

is then the sum of two terms,

B
B
B
+ B

M .

B

B = B
B

0

I

I

*

FIGURE 20–44 Iron-core toroid.

B
B

BM W B

in Eq. 20–8  (

is the field due to the current in the solenoid coil and
0 .
B = m
0
m,
B = mNI(cid:2)l.

B
B
is the additional field due
M
0
to the iron. Often
The total field can also be written by replacing the
m
constant
for a solenoid) by another constant called
0
the magnetic permeability which is characteristic of the magnetic material inside
is  much  greater
the  coil. Then
m,
† The value of
0 .
than
however, is not constant for ferromagnetic materials; it depends on the strength
of the “external” field

For  ferromagnetic  materials,
m
For all other materials, its value is very close to

as the following experiment shows.

NI(cid:2)l

m
0 .

B

m

0 ,

B
B

Hysteresis
Measurements on magnetic materials often use a torus or toroid, which is like a
long solenoid bent into the shape of a donut (Fig. 20–44), so practically all the
lines of
remain within the toroid. Consider a toroid with an iron core that is
initially unmagnetized and there is no current in the wire loops. Then the current I
is slowly increased, and
(which is due only to I) increases linearly with I. The
total  field  B also  increases, but  follows  the  curved  line  shown  in  Fig. 20–45
which is a graph of total B vs.
Initially, point a, the domains are randomly
B
increases, the domains become more and more aligned until at
oriented. As
0
point  b, nearly  all  are  aligned. The  iron  is  said  to  be  approaching  saturation.

B
0

0 .

B

FIGURE 20–45 Total magnetic field B in an
iron-core toroid as a function of the external
B
field
0
We use gauss
are clear.

(1 G = 10–4 T)

so that labels

is caused by the current I in the coil).

B
(
0

B (G)

b

FIGURE 20–46 Hysteresis curve.

12,000

B (G)

b

10,000
8000
6000
4000
2000

c

a

d

0

4

g

8

B0 (G)

12

12,000

10,000
8000
6000
4000
2000

a

B0 (G)

0

4

8

12

e

f

B
0

decreases. If the current
Next, suppose current in the coil is reduced, so the field
B
)  is  reduced  to  zero, point  c  in  Fig. 20–46, the  domains  do  not become
(and
0
completely  random. Instead, some  permanent  magnetism  remains  in  the  iron
core. If the current is increased in the opposite direction, enough domains can be
turned around so the total B becomes zero at point d. As the reverse current is
increased further, the iron approaches saturation in the opposite direction, point e.
Finally, if  the  current  is  again  reduced  to  zero  (point  f )  and  then  increased  in
the  original  direction, the  total  field  follows  the  path  efgb, again  approaching
saturation at point b.

Notice that the field did not pass through the origin (point a) in this cycle.
The fact that the curve does not retrace itself on the same path is called hysteresis.
The  curve  bcdefgb  is  called  a  hysteresis  loop. In  such  a  cycle, much  energy  is
transformed to thermal energy (friction) due to realigning of the domains. Note
that at points c and f, the iron core is magnetized even though there is no current
in the coils. These points correspond to a permanent magnet.
†All  materials  are  slightly  magnetic. Nonferromagnetic  materials  fall  into  two  principal  classes:
(1) paramagnetic materials consist of atoms that have a net magnetic dipole moment which can align
slightly with an external field, just as the galvanometer coil in Fig. 20–35 experiences a torque that
tends to align it; (2) diamagnetic materials have atoms with no net dipole moment, but in the pres-
ence  of  an  external  field  electrons  revolving  in  one  direction  increase  in  speed  slightly  whereas
electrons revolving in the opposite direction are reduced in speed; the result is a slight net magnetic
effect that opposes the external field.

580 CHAPTER 20

Summary

A magnet has two poles, north and south. The north pole is that
end which points toward geographic north when the magnet is
freely suspended. Like poles of two magnets repel each other,
whereas unlike poles attract.

We can picture that a magnetic field surrounds every mag-

net. The SI unit for magnetic field is the tesla (T).

Electric  currents  produce  magnetic  fields. For  example,
the lines of magnetic field due to a current in a straight wire
form  circles  around  the  wire, and  the  field  exerts  a  force  on
magnets (or currents) near it.

A magnetic field exerts a force on an electric current. For
a  straight  wire  of  length  carrying  a  current  I, the  force  has
magnitude

l

u

F = IlB sin u,

(20;1)
is the angle between the magnetic field  and the cur-
where
rent direction. The direction of the force is perpendicular to the
current-carrying  wire  and  to  the  magnetic  field, and  is  given
by a right-hand rule. Equation 20–1 serves as the definition of
magnetic field

B
B
.

B
B

Similarly, a  magnetic  field  exerts  a  force  on  a  charge  q

moving with velocity  of magnitude

v

u

(20;3)
F = qvB sin u,
B
vB
is  the  angle  between
is
where
F
B
vB
(again  a  right-hand  rule). The
perpendicular  to
B
path of a charged particle moving perpendicular to a uniform
magnetic field is a circle.

The  direction  of

and  to

and

B
.
B

The magnitude of the magnetic field produced  by  a cur-

rent I in a long straight wire, at a distance r from the wire, is

B =

m
0
2p

I
r

.

Questions

(20;6)

1. A  compass  needle  is  not  always  balanced  parallel  to  the
Earth’s surface, but one end may dip downward. Explain.
2. Explain why the Earth’s “north pole” is really a magnetic
south pole. Indicate how north and south magnetic poles
were defined and how we can tell experimentally that the
north pole is really a south magnetic pole.

3. In what direction are the magnetic field lines surrounding
a  straight  wire  carrying  a  current  that  is  moving  directly
away from you? Explain.

4. A horseshoe magnet is held vertically with the north pole on
the left and south pole on the right. A wire passing between
the poles, equidistant from them, carries a current directly
away from you. In what direction is the force on the wire?
Explain.

5. Will a magnet attract any metallic object, such as those made
of aluminum or copper? (Try it and see.) Why is this so?
6. Two iron bars attract each other no matter which ends are

placed close together. Are both magnets? Explain.

7. The  magnetic  field  due  to  current  in  wires  in  your  home
can affect a compass. Discuss the effect in terms of currents,
including if they are ac or dc.

8. If a negatively charged particle enters a region of uniform
magnetic  field  which  is  perpendicular  to  the  particle’s
velocity, will  the  kinetic  energy  of  the  particle  increase,
decrease, or stay the same? Explain your answer. (Neglect
gravity and assume there is no electric field.)

Two currents exert a force on each other via the magnetic
field  each  produces. Parallel  currents  in  the  same  direction
attract each other; currents in opposite directions repel.

The magnetic field inside a long tightly wound solenoid is
(20;8)
where N is the number of loops in a length  of coil, and I is the
current in each loop.

0 NI(cid:2)l,

B = m

l

Ampère’s law states that around any chosen closed loop
times the component
times  the  current  I

¢l
m
0

B
B

path, the sum of each path segment
parallel  to  the  segment  equals
of
enclosed by the closed path:
©B7 ¢l = m
0
t

(20;9)
Iencl .
B
The torque  on N loops of current I in a magnetic field
B

is

t = NIAB sin u.

(20;10)
The  force  or  torque  exerted  on  a  current-carrying  wire  by  a
magnetic field is the basis for operation of many devices, such
as motors, loudspeakers, and  galvanometers used  in  analog
electric meters.

[*A mass spectrometer uses electric and magnetic fields to

determine the mass of ions.]

[*Iron  and  a  few  other  materials  that  are  ferromagnetic
can  be  made  into  strong  permanent  magnets. Ferromagnetic
materials are made up of tiny domains—each a tiny magnet—
which are preferentially aligned in a permanent magnet. When
iron or another ferromagnetic material is placed in a magnetic
due to a current, the iron becomes magnetized. When
field
the  current  is  turned  off, the  material  remains  magnetized;
when the current is increased in the opposite direction, a graph
B
of the total field B versus
is a hysteresis loop, and the fact
0
that the curve does not retrace itself is called hysteresis.]

B
0

±

–

or

9. In  Fig. 20–47, charged  particles  move  in  the  vicinity  of  a
current-carrying wire. For each charged particle, the arrow
indicates the initial direction of motion of the particle, and
the
indicates  the  sign  of  the  charge. For  each  of
the particles, indicate the
direction of the magnetic
force  due  to  the  mag-
netic  field  produced  by
the wire. Explain.

a
+

–

b

I

FIGURE 20–47
Question 9.

c
–

d

+

10. Three  particles, a, b, and  c, enter  a  magnetic  field  and

follow paths as shown in
Fig. 20–48. What can you
say  about  the  charge  on
each particle? Explain.

a, b, c

FIGURE 20–48
Question 10.

a

c

b

11. Can an iron rod attract a magnet? Can a magnet attract an
iron rod? What must you consider to answer these questions?

Questions

581

12. A  positively  charged  particle  in  a  nonuniform  magnetic
field  follows  the  trajectory  shown  in  Fig. 20–49. Indicate
the direction of the magnetic field at points near the path,
assuming the path is always in the plane of the page, and
indicate the relative magnitudes of the field in each region.
Explain your answers.

FIGURE 20–49
Question 12.

vB

+

a

b

c

d

e

13. Explain why a strong magnet held near a CRT television
screen  (Section  17–10)  causes  the  picture  to  become
distorted. Also, explain  why  the  picture  sometimes  goes
completely  black  where  the  field  is  the  strongest. [But
don’t risk damage to your TV by trying this.]

14. Suppose you have three iron rods, two of which are magne-
tized but the third is not. How would you determine which
two are the magnets without using any additional objects?

15. Can you set a resting electron into motion with a magnetic

field? With an electric field? Explain.

16. A charged particle is moving in a circle under the influence
of a uniform magnetic field. If an electric field that points
in  the  same  direction  as  the  magnetic  field  is  turned  on,
describe the path the charged particle will take.

17. A charged particle moves in a straight line through a partic-
ular region of space. Could there be a nonzero magnetic field
in this region? If so, give two possible situations.

18. If a moving charged particle is deflected sideways in some
B Z 0
B

region of space, can we conclude, for certain, that
in that region? Explain.

19. Two insulated long wires carrying equal currents I cross at
right angles to each other. Describe the magnetic force one
exerts on the other.

20. A horizontal current-carrying wire, free to move in Earth’s
gravitational field, is suspended directly above a parallel,
current-carrying wire. (a) In what direction is the current in
the lower wire? (b) Can the lower wire be held in stable equi-
librium due to the magnetic force of the upper wire? Explain.
21. What  would  be  the  effect  on  B inside  a  long  solenoid  if
(a) the diameter of all the loops was doubled, (b) the spacing
between loops was doubled, or (c) the solenoid’s length was
doubled along with a doubling in the total number of loops?
22. A type of magnetic switch similar to a solenoid is a relay
(Fig. 20–50). A relay is an electromagnet (the iron rod inside
the coil does not move) which, when activated, attracts a
strip of iron on a pivot. Design a relay to close an electrical
switch. A relay is used when you need to switch on a circuit
carrying a very large current but do not want that large cur-
rent flowing through the main switch. For example, a car’s
starter switch is connected to a relay so that the large current
needed for the starter doesn’t pass to the dashboard switch.

FIGURE 20–50
Question 22.

*23. Two ions have the same mass, but one is singly ionized and
the other is doubly ionized. How will their positions on the
film of a mass spectrometer (Fig. 20–41) differ? Explain.

*24. Why will either pole of a magnet attract an unmagnetized

piece of iron?

*25. An  unmagnetized  nail  will  not  attract  an  unmagnetized
paper clip. However, if one end of the nail is in contact with
a magnet, the other end will attract a paper clip. Explain.

MisConceptual Questions

1. Indicate  which  of  the  following  will  produce  a  magnetic

4. When a charged particle moves parallel to the direction of

field:
(a) A magnet.
(b) The Earth.
(c) An electric charge at rest.
(d) A moving electric charge.
(e) An electric current.
(f ) The voltage of a battery not connected to anything.
(g) An ordinary piece of iron.
(h) A piece of any metal.

2. A current in a wire points into the page as
shown  at  the  right. In  which  direction
is  the  magnetic  field  at  point  A  (choose
below)?

I

A

B

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e) None of these.

3. In  which  direction  (see  above)  is  the  magnetic  field  at

a magnetic field, the particle travels in a
(a) straight line.
(b) circular path.

(c) helical path.
(d) hysteresis loop.

5. As a proton moves through space, it creates

(a) an electric field only.
(b) a magnetic field only.
(c) both an electric field and magnetic field.
(d) nothing; the electric field and magnetic fields cancel

each other out.

6. Which  statements  about  the  force  on  a  charged  particle

placed in a magnetic field are true?
(a) A magnetic force is exerted only if the particle is

moving.

(b) The force is a maximum if the particle is moving in the

direction of the field.

(c) The force causes the particle to gain kinetic energy.
(d) The direction of the force is along the magnetic field.
(e) A magnetic field always exerts a force on a charged

point B?

particle.

582 CHAPTER 20 Magnetism

7. Which of the following statements is false? The magnetic

10. For a charged particle, a constant magnetic field can be used

field of a current-carrying wire
(a) is directed circularly around the wire.
(b) decreases inversely with the distance from the wire.
(c) exists only if the current in the wire is changing.
(d) depends on the magnitude of the current.

to change
(a) only the direction of the particle’s velocity.
(b) only the magnitude of the particle’s velocity.
(c) both the magnitude and direction of the particle’s velocity.
(d) None of the above.

8. A wire carries a current directly away from you. Which way
do the magnetic field lines produced by this wire point?
(a) They point parallel to the wire in the direction of the

current.

(b) They point parallel to the wire opposite the direction

of the current.

(c) They point toward the wire.
(d) They point away from the wire.
(e) They make circles around the wire.

9. A proton enters a uniform magnetic field that is perpen-
dicular to the proton’s velocity (Fig. 20–51). What happens
to the kinetic energy of the proton?
(a) It increases.
(b) It decreases.
(c) It stays the same.
(d) It depends on the velocity direction.
(e) It depends on the B field direction.

FIGURE 20–51
MisConceptual Question 9.

11. Which  of  the  following  statements  about  the  force on  a
charged particle due to a magnetic field are not valid?
(a) It depends on the particle’s charge.
(b) It depends on the particle’s velocity.
(c) It depends on the strength of the external magnetic field.
(d) It acts at right angles to the direction of the particle’s

motion.

(e) None of the above; all of these statements are valid.

12. Two parallel wires are vertical. The one on the left carries
a 10-A current upward. The other carries 5-A current down-
ward. Compare the magnitude of the force that each wire
exerts on the other.
(a) The wire on the left carries twice as much current, so
it exerts twice the force on the right wire as the right
one exerts on the left one.

(b) The wire on the left exerts a smaller force. It creates a
magnetic field twice that due to the wire on the right;
and therefore has less energy to cause a force on the
wire on the right.

(c) The two wires exert the same force on each other.
(d) Not enough information; we need the length of the wire.

For assigned homework and other learning materials, go to the MasteringPhysics website.

Problems

20–3 Force on Electric Current in Magnetic Field

1. (I) (a) What is the force per meter of length on a straight
wire  carrying  a  6.40-A  current  when  perpendicular  to
a 0.90-T  uniform  magnetic  field? (b)  What  if  the  angle
between the wire and field is 35.0°?

2. (I) How much current is flowing in a wire 4.80 m long if the
maximum force on it is 0.625 N when placed in a uniform
0.0800-T field?

3. (I) A 240-m length of wire stretches between two towers and
carries a 120-A current. Determine the magnitude of the
force  on  the  wire  due  to  the  Earth’s  magnetic  field  of
5.0 * 10–5 T

which makes an angle of 68° with the wire.

4. (I) A 2.6-m length of horizontal wire carries a 4.5-A current
toward  the  south. The  dip  angle  of  the  Earth’s  magnetic
field makes an angle of 41° to the wire. Estimate the magni-
tude of the magnetic force on the wire due to the Earth’s
.
magnetic field of

5.5 * 10–5 T

5. (I) The magnetic force per meter on a wire is measured to
be  only  45% of  its  maximum  possible  value. What  is  the
angle between the wire and the magnetic field?

6. (II) The force on a wire carrying 6.45 A is a maximum of
1.28 N when placed between the pole faces of a magnet. If
the pole faces are 55.5 cm in diameter, what is the approx-
imate strength of the magnetic field?

7. (II) The  force  on  a  wire  is  a  maximum  of

8.50 * 10–2 N
when  placed  between  the  pole  faces  of  a  magnet. The
current  flows  horizontally  to  the  right  and  the  magnetic
field is vertical. The wire is observed to “jump” toward the
observer when the current is turned on. (a) What type of
magnetic pole is the top pole face? (b) If the pole faces have
a diameter of 10.0 cm, estimate the current in the wire if
the field is 0.220 T. (c) If the wire is tipped so that it makes
an  angle  of  10.0° with  the  horizontal, what  force  will  it
now  feel? [Hint: What  length  of  wire  will  now  be  in  the
field?]

8. (II)  Suppose  a  straight  1.00-mm-diameter  copper  wire
could  just “float” horizontally  in  air  because  of  the  force
which  is  horizontal,
due  to  the  Earth’s  magnetic  field
5.0 * 10–5 T.
perpendicular to the wire, and of magnitude
What current would the wire carry? Does the answer seem
feasible? Explain briefly.

B
,
B

Problems

583

20–4 Force on Charge Moving in Magnetic Field

9. (I) Determine the magnitude and direction of the force on
7.75 * 105 m(cid:2)s
an electron traveling
horizontally to the east
in a vertically upward magnetic field of strength 0.45 T.
10. (I) An electron is projected vertically upward with a speed
of
into a uniform magnetic field of 0.640 T
that  is  directed  horizontally  away  from  the  observer.
Describe the electron’s path in this field.

1.70 * 106 m(cid:2)s

11. (I) Alpha particles (charge
1.6 * 106 m(cid:2)s.

m = 6.6 * 10–27 kg
)
What  magnetic  field  strength
move  at
would  be  required  to  bend  them  into  a  circular  path  of
radius

r = 0.14 m?

q = ±2e

, mass

12. (I) Find the direction of the force on a negative charge for
each diagram shown in Fig. 20–52, where
vB
(green) is the
(blue) is the direction of the
velocity of the charge and
magnetic field. ( means the vector points inward. means
it points outward, toward you.)

B
B

(cid:3)

(cid:2)

vB

B
B

(a)

B
B

vB

(b)

FIGURE 20–52
Problem 12.

B
B

vB

(c)

B
B

vB
(e)

B
B

vB

(d)

vB

B
B

(f)

13. (I)  Determine  the  direction  of

for  each  case  in
represents  the  maximum  magnetic

B
B

B
F

Fig. 20–53, where
force  on  a  positively
charged  particle  moving
with velocity vB.

FIGURE 20–53
Problem 13.

vB

B
F

(a)

vB

B
F

(b)

B
F

vB

(c)

B
E

B
B

14. (II) What is the velocity of a beam of electrons that goes
undeflected  when  moving  perpendicular  to  an  electric
are  also  perpendicular
and  to  a  magnetic  field.
and
7.7 * 103 V(cid:2)m
and
to  each  other  and  have  magnitudes
7.5 * 10–3 T,
respectively. What  is  the  radius  of  the
electron orbit if the electric field is turned off?
(Q = ±2e)

6.6 * 10–27 kg
is accelerated by a voltage of 3700 V. (a) What is its speed?
(b)  What  will  be  its  radius  of  curvature  if  it  moves  in  a
plane perpendicular to a uniform 0.340-T field? (c) What
is its period of revolution?

15. (II) A helium ion

whose mass is

16. (II)  For  a  particle  of  mass  m and  charge  q moving  in  a
circular path in a magnetic field B, (a) show that its kinetic
energy is proportional to
the square of the radius of curva-
ture  of  its  path. (b)  Show  that  its  angular  momentum
around the center of the circle.
is

L = qBr2,

r2,

17. (II)  A  1.5-MeV  (kinetic  energy)  proton  enters  a  0.30-T
field, in  a  plane  perpendicular  to  the  field. What  is  the
radius of its path? See Section 17–4.

18. (II) An electron experiences the greatest force as it travels
2.8 * 106 m(cid:2)s
in a magnetic field when it is moving north-
ward. The  force  is  vertically  upward  and  of  magnitude
6.2 * 10–13 N.
What is the magnitude and direction of the
magnetic field?

19. (II) A proton and an electron have the same kinetic energy
upon entering a region of constant magnetic field. What is
the ratio of the radii of their circular paths?

584 CHAPTER 20 Magnetism

Q = 2eB

Am = 2mp ,

), a deuteron

mp
Am = 4mp ,

21. (III) A  3.40-g  bullet  moves  with  a  speed  of

Q = eB,
20. (III) A proton (mass
are accelerated
and an alpha particle
by the same potential difference V and then enter a uniform
B
where  they  move  in  circular  paths  per-
magnetic  field
,
B
B
pendicular to  Determine the radius of the paths for the
B
.
deuteron and alpha particle in terms of that for the proton.
155 m(cid:2)s
per-
5.00 * 10–5 T.
pendicular to the Earth’s magnetic field of
If  the  bullet  possesses  a  net  charge  of
by
what distance will it be deflected from its path due to the
Earth’s magnetic field after it has traveled 1.50 km?
*22. (III) A Hall probe, consisting of a thin rectangular slab of
is  calibrated  by  placing  it  in
current-carrying  material,
a known  magnetic  field  of  magnitude  0.10 T. When  the
field  is  oriented  normal  to  the  slab’s  rectangular  face,
a Hall emf of 12 mV is measured across the slab’s width.
The probe is then placed in a magnetic field of unknown
magnitude B, and  a  Hall  emf  of  63 mV  is  measured.
Determine B assuming  that  the  angle
between  the
unknown field and the plane of the slab’s rectangular face
u = 60°.
is (a)

18.5 * 10–9 C,

u = 90°,

and (b)

u

*23. (III) The Hall effect can be used to measure blood flow rate
because the blood contains ions that constitute an electric
current. (a)  Does  the  sign  of  the  ions  influence  the  emf?
Explain. (b) Determine the flow velocity in an artery 3.3 mm
in  diameter  if  the  measured  emf  across  the  width  of  the
artery is 0.13 mV and B is 0.070 T. (In actual practice, an
alternating magnetic field is used.)

*24. (III) A long copper strip 1.8 cm wide and 1.0 mm thick is
placed in a 1.2-T magnetic field as in Fig. 20–21a. When a
steady  current  of  15 A  passes  through  it, the  Hall  emf  is
measured to be
Determine (a) the drift velocity of
the electrons and (b) the density of free (conducting) elec-
trons (number per unit volume) in the copper. [Hint: See also
Section 18–8.]

1.02 mV.

20–5 and 20–6 Magnetic Field of Straight Wire,

Force between Two Wires

25. (I) Jumper cables used to start a stalled vehicle often carry
a  65-A  current. How  strong  is  the  magnetic  field  4.5 cm
from  one  cable? Compare  to  the  Earth’s  magnetic  field
(5.0 * 10–5 T).

26. (I) If an electric wire is allowed to produce a magnetic field
no larger than that of the Earth
at a distance
of 12 cm from the wire, what is the maximum current the
wire can carry?

A0.50 * 10–4 TB

27. (I)  Determine  the  magnitude  and  direction  of  the  force
between  two  parallel  wires  25 m  long  and  4.0 cm  apart,
each carrying 25 A in the same direction.

28. (I) A vertical straight wire carrying an upward 28-A current
7.8 * 10–4 N(cid:2)m
exerts an attractive force per unit length of
on  a  second  parallel  wire  9.0 cm  away. What  current
(magnitude and direction) flows in the second wire?
29. (II) In Fig. 20–54, a long straight wire carries current I out of
the page toward you. Indicate, with appropriate arrows, the
direction and (relative)
magnitude of  at each
of  the  points  C, D,
and E in the plane of
the page.

B
B

D

C

FIGURE 20–54
Problem 29.

I

E

30. (II) An experiment on the Earth’s magnetic field is being
carried  out  1.00 m  from  an  electric  cable. What  is  the
maximum allowable current in the cable if the experiment
is to be accurate to

&3.0%?

31. (II) A rectangular loop of wire is placed next to a straight
wire, as shown in Fig. 20–55. There is a current of 3.5 A in
both  wires. Deter-
mine  the  magnitude
and  direction  of  the
net force on the loop.

3.0 cm

3.5 A

3.5 A

5.0 cm

FIGURE 20–55
Problem 31.

10.0 cm

32. (II) A horizontal compass is placed 18 cm due south from
a straight vertical wire carrying a 48-A current downward.
In  what  direction  does  the  compass  needle  point  at  this
location? Assume the horizontal component of the Earth’s
and  the  magnetic
field  at  this  point  is
declination is 0°.

0.45 * 10–4 T

33. (II) A  long  horizontal  wire  carries  24.0 A  of  current  due
north. What is the net magnetic field 20.0 cm due west of the
wire if the Earth’s field there points downward, 44° below
the horizontal, and has magnitude

5.0 * 10–5 T?

34. (II) A  straight  stream  of  protons  passes  a  given  point  in
2.5 * 109 protons(cid:2)s.
space at a rate of
What magnetic field
do they produce 1.5 m from the beam?

35. (II)  Determine  the  magnetic  field  midway  between  two
long straight wires 2.0 cm apart in terms of the current I in
one  when  the  other  carries  25 A. Assume  these  currents
are (a) in the same direction, and (b) in opposite directions.

36. (II)  Two  straight  parallel  wires  are  separated  by  7.0 cm.
There is a 2.0-A current flowing in the first wire. If the mag-
netic  field  strength  is  found  to  be  zero  between  the  two
wires at a distance of 2.2 cm from the first wire, what is the
magnitude and direction of the current in the second wire?

37. (II) Two long straight wires each carry a current I out of

the  page  toward  the  viewer, Fig. 20–56.
Indicate, with appropriate arrows, the direc-
tion of
at each of the points 1 to 6 in the
plane of the page. State if the field is zero
at any of the points.

B
B

I

I

1

2

3

4

5

6

FIGURE 20–56
Problem 37.

38. (II) A power line carries a current of 95 A west along the
tops  of  8.5-m-high  poles. (a) What  is  the  magnitude  and
direction  of  the  magnetic  field  produced  by  this  wire  at
the ground directly below? How does this compare with the
Earth’s magnetic field of about
(b) Where would the
wire’s magnetic field cancel the Earth’s field?

1
2 G?

39. (II) A compass needle points 17° E of N outdoors. However,
when it is placed 12.0 cm to the east of a vertical wire inside
a building, it points 32° E of N. What is the magnitude and
direction of the current in the wire? The Earth’s field there
is

0.50 * 10–4 T

and is horizontal.

40. (II) A long pair of insulated wires serves to conduct 24.5 A
of dc current to and from an instrument. If the wires are of
negligible  diameter  but  are  2.8 mm  apart, what  is  the
in  their
magnetic  field  10.0 cm  from  their  midpoint,
plane (Fig.20–57)?
Compare  to  the
magnetic  field  of
the Earth.

I

I

10.0 cm

FIGURE 20–57
Problems 40 and 41.

2.8 mm

41. (II) A  third  wire  is  placed  in  the  plane  of  the  two  wires
shown  in  Fig. 20–57  parallel  and  just  to  the  right. If  it
carries 25.0 A upward, what force per meter of length does
it exert on each of the other two wires? Assume it is 2.8 mm
from the nearest wire, center to center.

42. (III) Two long thin parallel wires 13.0 cm apart carry 28-A

currents  in  the  same
direction. Determine
the  magnetic  field
vector  at  a  point
10.0 cm
from  one
wire and 6.0 cm from
the other (Fig. 20–58).

FIGURE 20–58
Problem 42.

6.0 cm

P

m
c

0
.
3
1

0.0 cm

1

43. (III) Two long wires are oriented so that they are perpen-
dicular  to  each  other. At  their  closest, they  are  20.0 cm
apart (Fig. 20–59). What is the magnitude of the magnetic
field at a point midway between them if the top one carries
a current of 20.0 A and
the bottom  one  carries
12.0 A?

IT
10.0 cm

= 20.0 A

B = ?

10.0 cm

Bottom wire

= 12.0 A

IB

FIGURE 20–59
Problem 43.

20–7 Solenoids and Electromagnets

44. (I) A thin 12-cm-long solenoid has a total of 460 turns of
wire and carries a current of 2.0 A. Calculate the field inside
the solenoid near the center.

45. (I)  A  30.0-cm-long  solenoid  1.25 cm  in  diameter  is  to
produce a field of 4.65 mT at its center. How much current
should the solenoid carry if it has 935 turns of the wire?
46. (I) A 42-cm-long solenoid, 1.8 cm in diameter, is to produce
a 0.030-T magnetic field at its center. If the maximum cur-
rent is 4.5 A, how many turns must the solenoid have?

Problems

585

47. (II) A 550-turn horizontal solenoid is 15 cm long. The current
in its coils is 38 A. A straight wire cuts through the center
of the solenoid, along a 3.0-cm diameter. This wire carries
a 22-A current downward (and is connected by other wires
that  don’t  concern  us). What  is  the  force  on  this  wire
assuming the solenoid’s magnetic field points due east?
48. (III) You have 1.0 kg of copper and want to make a prac-
tical solenoid that produces the greatest possible magnetic
field for a given voltage. Should you make your copper wire
long and thin, short and fat, or something else? Consider
other variables, such as solenoid diameter, length, and so
on. Explain your reasoning.

20–8 Ampère’s Law

49. (III)  A  toroid is  a  solenoid  in  the  shape  of  a  donut
(Fig. 20–60). Use Ampère’s  law  along  the  circular  paths,
shown dashed in Fig. 20–60a, to determine that the mag-
where
netic field (a) inside the toroid is
N is the total number of turns, and (b) outside the toroid
is
(c)  Is  the  field  inside  a  toroid  uniform  like  a
solenoid’s? If not, how does it vary?

0 NI(cid:2)2pR,

B = 0.

B = m

I

I

R

B
B

Path 1

Path 2

(a)

(b)

FIGURE 20–60 Problem 49. (a) A toroid or torus.
(b) A section of the toroid showing direction of the
(cid:2)
current for three loops: means current toward
you, and  means current away from you.

z

I(cid:2)2pr

50. (III) (a) Use Ampère’s law to show that the magnetic field
between the conductors of a coaxial cable (Fig. 20–61) is
B = m
if r (distance  from  center)  is  greater  than
0
the radius of the inner wire and less than
the radius of the outer cylindrical
braid
(b)  Show
B = 0
coaxial cable.

(=  ground)
.
that
outside the

Insulating
sleeve

I

r

FIGURE 20–61
Coaxial cable.
Problem 50.

I Solid wire

Cylindrical braid

20–9 and 20–10 Torque on Current Loop, Motors,
Galvanometers

51. (I) A single square loop of wire 22.0 cm on a side is placed
with its face parallel to the magnetic field as in Fig. 20–34b.
0.325 m(cid:2)N.
When 5.70 A flows in the coil, the torque on it is
What is the magnetic field strength?

52. (I) If the current to a motor drops by 12%, by what factor

does the output torque change?

586 CHAPTER 20 Magnetism

53. (I) A galvanometer needle deflects full scale for a

53.0-mA
current. What current will give full-scale deflection if the
magnetic field weakens to 0.760 of its original value?
54. (II) A circular coil 12.0 cm in diameter and containing nine
loops lies flat on the ground. The Earth’s magnetic field at
this location has magnitude
and points into
the  Earth  at  an  angle  of  56.0° below  a  line  pointing  due
north. If a 7.20-A clockwise current passes through the coil,
(a) determine the torque on the coil, and (b) which edge of
the coil rises up: north, east, south, or west?

5.50 * 10–5 T

*20–11 Mass Spectrometer
*55. (I) Protons move in a circle of radius 6.10 cm in a 0.566-T
magnetic field. What value of electric field could make their
paths straight? In what direction must the electric field point?
*56. (I) In a mass spectrometer, germanium atoms have radii of
curvature equal to 21.0, 21.6, 21.9, 22.2, and 22.8 cm. The
largest radius corresponds to an atomic mass of 76 u. What
are the atomic masses of the other isotopes?

2.88 * 104 V(cid:2)m

1.67 * 10–27 kg.

B = B¿ = 0.68 T.

*57. (II) Suppose the electric field between the electric plates in
the mass spectrometer of Fig. 20–41 is
and
The source con-
the magnetic fields are
tains carbon isotopes of mass numbers 12, 13, and 14 from
a long-dead piece of a tree. (To estimate masses of the atoms,
multiply by
) How far apart are the lines
formed by the singly charged ions of each type on the photo-
graphic film? What if the ions were doubly charged?
*58. (II) One form of mass spectrometer accelerates ions by a
voltage V before they enter a magnetic field B. The ions
are assumed to start from rest. Show that the mass of an
where R is the radius of the ions’
ion is
path in the magnetic field and q is their charge.

m = qB2R2(cid:2)2V,

*59. (II) An unknown particle moves in a straight line through
E = 1.5 kV(cid:2)m
If the electric field is turned off, the par-
What

crossed  electric  and  magnetic  fields  with
and
ticle  moves  in  a  circular  path  of  radius
might the particle be?

B = 0.034 T.

r = 2.7 cm.

*60. (III) A mass spectrometer is monitoring air pollutants. It is
difficult, however, to separate molecules of nearly equal mass
How  large  a
such  as  CO  (28.0106 u)  and
radius of curvature must a spectrometer have (Fig. 20–41)
if these two molecules are to be separated on the film by
0.50 mm?

 (28.0134 u).

N2

*20–12 Ferromagnetism, Hysteresis
*61. (I) A long thin iron-core solenoid has 380 loops of wire per
meter, and a 350-mA current flows through the wire. If the
3000m
permeability of the iron is
what is the total field B
inside the solenoid?

0 ,

*62. (II)  An  iron-core  solenoid  is  38 cm  long  and  1.8 cm  in
diameter, and  has  780 turns  of  wire. The  magnetic  field
inside  the  solenoid  is  2.2 T  when  48 A  flows  in  the  wire.
m
What is the permeability  at this high field strength?

*63. (II) The following are some values of B and

B
0

for a piece

of iron as it is being magnetized (note different units):

(10(cid:3)4 T)
B
0
B(T)

(10(cid:3)4 T)
B
0
B(T)

0.0
0.0

0.13
0.0042

0.25
0.010

0.50
0.028

0.78

0.63
0.043 0.095

1.0
0.45

1.3
0.67

1.9
2.5
1.01 1.18

6.3
1.44

13.0
1.58

130
1.72

1300
2.26

10,000
3.15

Determine the magnetic permeability
plot a graph of  versus B

m

0 .

m

for each value and

General Problems

64. Two  long  straight  parallel  wires  are  15 cm  apart. Wire A
carries 2.0-A current. Wire B’s current is 4.0 A in the same
direction. (a) Determine the magnetic field magnitude due
to wire A at the position of wire B. (b) Determine the mag-
netic field due to wire B at the position of wire A. (c) Are
these  two  magnetic  fields  equal  and  opposite? Why  or
why not? (d) Determine the force on wire A due to wire B,
and the force on wire B due to wire A. Are these two forces
equal and opposite? Why or why not?

65. Protons with momentum

are magnet-
ically steered clockwise in a circular path 2.2 m in diameter.
Determine the magnitude and direction of the field in the
magnets surrounding the beam pipe.

4.8 * 10–21 kg(cid:2)m(cid:2)s

66. A small but rigid

´-shaped

wire carrying a 5.0-A current
(Fig. 20–62)  is  placed  inside  a  solenoid. The  solenoid  is
15.0 cm  long  and  has  700 loops  of  wire, and  the  current
in  each  loop  is
7.0 A. What is the
net  force  on  the
´-shaped

I = 5.0 A

wire?

I

FIGURE 20–62
Problem 66.

I

B
B

67. The power cable for an electric trolley (Fig. 20–63) carries
a horizontal current of 330 A toward the east. The Earth’s
magnetic  field  has  a  strength
and  makes  an
angle of dip of 22° at this location. Calculate the magnitude
and  direction  of  the
magnetic force on an
18-m  length  of  this
cable.

5.0 * 10–5 T

I = 330 A

FIGURE 20–63
Problem 67.

68. A particle of charge q moves in a circular path of radius r
perpendicular to a uniform magnetic field B. Determine its
linear momentum in terms of the quantities given.

69. An  airplane  has  acquired  a  net  charge  of

the Earth’s magnetic field of
to the airplane’s velocity of magnitude
the force on the airplane.

5.0 * 10–5 T

1280 mC.
If
is perpendicular
determine

120 m(cid:2)s,

70. A 32-cm-long solenoid, 1.8 cm in diameter, is to produce a
0.050-T magnetic field at its center. If the maximum current
is 6.4 A, how many turns must the solenoid have?

71. Near  the  equator,

the  Earth’s  magnetic  field  points
almost  horizontally  to  the  north  and  has  magnitude
B = 0.50 * 10–4 T.
What  should  be  the  magnitude  and
direction for the velocity of an electron if its weight is to be
exactly balanced by the magnetic force?

72. A  doubly  charged  helium  atom, whose  mass

is
6.6 * 10–27 kg,
is  accelerated  by  a  voltage  of  3200 V.
(a) What  will  be  its  radius  of  curvature  in  a  uniform
0.240-T field? (b) What is its period of revolution?

73. Four very long straight parallel wires, located at the corners

l,
of a square of side
I
carry equal currents
0
perpendicular  to  the
page  as  shown
in
Fig. 20–64. Determine
the  magnitude  and
direction  of
at  the
center C of the square.

B
B

FIGURE 20–64
Problem 73.

l

l

C

l

l

12,000 V(cid:2)m

74. (a) What  value  of  magnetic  field  would  make  a  beam  of
4.8 * 106 m(cid:2)s,
electrons, traveling to the west at a speed of
go undeflected through a region where there is a uniform
electric  field  of
pointing  south? (b)  What
is the direction of the magnetic field if it is perpendicular
to the electric field? (c) What is the frequency of the circular
orbit of the electrons if the electric field is turned off?
75. Magnetic fields are very useful in particle accelerators for
“beam  steering”; that  is, the  magnetic  fields  can  be  used
to  change  the  direction  of  the  beam  of  charged  particles
without altering their speed (Fig. 20–65). Show how this could
work  with  a  beam  of  protons. What  happens  to  protons
that are not moving with the speed for which the magnetic
field was designed? If the field extends over a region 5.0 cm
wide  and  has  a  magnitude
of  0.41 T, by  approximately
what angle  will
a beam of protons
traveling  at
2.5 * 106 m(cid:2)s
be bent?

Magnet

B
B

u

u

FIGURE 20–65
Problem 75.

Evacuated tubes, inside
of which the protons move
with velocity indicated by
the green arrows

76. The magnetic field B at the center of a circular coil of wire

carrying a current I (as in Fig. 20–9) is
0 NI
2r

B =

m

,

where N is the number of loops in the coil and r is its radius.
Imagine  a  simple  model  in  which  the  Earth’s  magnetic
field of about 1 G
near the poles is produced
by  a single  current  loop  around  the  equator. Roughly
estimate the current this loop would carry.

A=  1 * 10–4 TB

77. A proton follows a spiral path through a gas in a uniform
magnetic  field  of  0.010 T, perpendicular  to  the  plane  of
the spiral, as shown in Fig. 20–66. In two successive loops,
at  points  P  and  Q, the  radii  are
10.0 mm and 8.5 mm, respectively.
Calculate the change in the kinetic
energy of the proton as it travels
from P to Q.

Q P

FIGURE 20–66
Problem 77.

General Problems

587

78. Two long straight aluminum wires, each of diameter 0.42 mm,

carry the same current but in opposite direc-
tions. They are suspended by 0.50-m-long
strings  as  shown  in  Fig. 20–67. If  the
suspension  strings  make  an  angle  of  3.0°
with  the  vertical  and  are  hanging  freely,
what is the current in the wires?

m 6.0°

0
5
.
0

FIGURE 20–67
Problem 78.

S

I1

I2

B
.
B

79. An electron enters a uniform magnetic field

at
a 45° angle to  Determine the radius r and pitch p (distance
between loops) of the electron’s helical path assuming its
speed is
See Fig. 20–68.

3.0 * 106 m(cid:2)s.

B
B

B = 0.23 T

FIGURE 20–68
Problem 79.

vB

p

2r

B
B

80. A motor run by a 9.0-V battery has a 20-turn square coil
When
with sides of length 5.0 cm and total resistance
spinning, the magnetic field felt by the wire in the coil is
0.020 T. What is the maximum torque on the motor?

28 (cid:3).

81. Electrons are accelerated horizontally by 2.2 kV. They then
pass through a uniform magnetic field B for a distance of
3.8 cm, which deflects them upward so they reach the top
of a screen 22 cm away, 11 cm above the center. Estimate
the value of B.

3.4 m(cid:2)s

82. A 175-g model airplane charged to 18.0 mC and traveling
at
passes within 8.6 cm of a wire, nearly parallel to
its path, carrying a 25-A current. What acceleration (in g’s)
does this interaction give the airplane?

l

l(cid:2)4

83. A uniform conducting rod of length  and mass m sits atop
a  fulcrum, which  is  placed  a  distance
from  the  rod’s
left-hand end and is immersed in a uniform magnetic field
of  magnitude  B directed  into  the  page  (Fig. 20–69). An
object whose mass M is 6.0 times greater than the rod’s mass
is hung from the rod’s left-hand end. What current (direction
and magnitude) should flow through the rod in order for
it  to  be  “balanced” (i.e., be  at  rest  horizontally)  on  the
fulcrum?
(Flexible
connecting wires which
exert negligible force
on  the  rod  are  not
shown.)

l/4

B
B

m

l

FIGURE 20–69
Problem 83.

M

0.50 * 10–4 T

84. Suppose  the  Earth’s  magnetic  field  at  the  equator  has
magnitude
and  a  northerly  direction  at  all
points. Estimate  the  speed  a  singly  ionized  uranium  ion
(m = 238 u,  q = ±e)
would need to circle the Earth 6.0 km
above the equator. Can you ignore gravity? [Ignore relativity.]

588 CHAPTER 20 Magnetism

B
0

B
0
x = l

85. A particle with charge q and momentum p, initially moving
along the x axis, enters a region where a uniform magnetic
extends over  a
field
y
as shown in
width
Fig. 20–70. The  particle
is  deflected  a  distance  d
in  the
direction  as  it
traverses the field. Deter-
mine  (a)  whether  q is
positive or negative, and
(b)  the  magnitude  of  its
momentum p in terms of
q,
and d.

±y

l,

B

pB

q

d

x

0 ,

FIGURE 20–70
Problem 85.

l

86. A  bolt  of  lightning  strikes  a  metal  flag  pole, one  end  of
which  is  anchored  in  the  ground. Estimate  the  force  the
Earth’s magnetic field can exert on the flag pole while the
lightning-induced current flows. See Example 18–10.
87. A  sort  of  “projectile  launcher” is  shown  in  Fig. 20–71.
A large current moves in a closed loop composed of fixed
rails, a power supply, and a very light, almost frictionless
bar  (pale  green)  touching  the  rails. A  magnetic  field  is
perpendicular to the plane of the circuit. If the bar has a
a mass of 1.5 g, and is placed in a field of
length
1.7 T, what  constant  current  flow  is  needed  to  accelerate
the bar from rest to
in a distance of 1.0 m? In what
direction must the magnetic field point?

l = 28 cm,

28 m(cid:2)s

I

FIGURE 20–71
Problem 87.

l

aB

I

I

V = V

88. The  cyclotron (Fig. 20–72)  is  a  device  used  to  accelerate
elementary particles such as protons to high speeds. Parti-
cles starting at point A with some initial velocity travel in
semicircular orbits in the magnetic field B. The particles are
accelerated to higher speeds each time they pass through
the gap between the metal “dees,” where there is an electric
field E. (There is no electric field inside the hollow metal
dees  where  the  electrons  move  in  circular  paths.) The
electric  field  changes  direction  each  half-cycle, owing
0 sin 2pft,
to  an  ac  voltage
so  that  the  particles
are  increased  in  speed  at  each  passage  through  the  gap.
(a)  Show  that  the  frequency  f of  the  voltage  must  be
f = Bq(cid:2)2pm,
where q is the charge on the particles and
m their  mass. (b)  Show  that  the  kinetic  energy  of  the
particles increases by
each revolution, assuming that
the gap is small. (c) If the radius of the cyclotron is 2.0 m
and  the  magnetic  field
strength  is  0.50 T, what
will be the maximum
kinetic  energy  of
accelerated  protons
in MeV?

2qV0

B
B

B
E

A

∼

FIGURE 20–72
A cyclotron.
Problem 88.

“Dees”

Gap

89. Three  long  parallel  wires  are  3.8 cm  from  one  another.
(Looking along them, they are at three corners of an equi-
lateral triangle.) The current in each wire is 8.00 A, but its
direction  in  wire  M  is  opposite  to  that  in  wires  N  and  P
(Fig. 20–73). (a)  Determine  the  magnetic  force  per  unit
length on each wire due to the other two. (b) In Fig. 20–73,
determine  the  magnitude  and  direction  of  the  magnetic
field  at  the  midpoint
of  the  line between
wire M and wire N.

M

3.8 cm

3.8 cm

FIGURE 20–73
Problems 89 and 90.

N

3.8 cm

P

90. In Fig. 20–73 the top wire is 1.00-mm-diameter copper wire
and  is  suspended  in  air  due  to  the  two  magnetic  forces
from the bottom two wires. The current flow through the
two bottom wires is 75 A in each. Calculate the required
current flow in the suspended wire (M).

Search and Learn

1. How  many  magnetic  force  equations  are  there  in
Chapter 20? List each one and explain when it applies. For
each  magnetic  force  equation, show  how  the  units  work
out to give force in newtons.

330 V(cid:2)m,

2. An  electron  is  moving  north  at  a  constant  speed  of
3.0 * 104 m(cid:2)s.
(a) In what direction should an electric field
point if the electron is to be accelerated to the east? (b) In
what direction should a magnetic field point if the electron
is to be accelerated to the west? (c) If the electric field of
part a has  a  strength  of
what  magnetic  field
(magnitude and direction) will produce zero net force on
the electron? (d) If the electron in part c is moving faster
in  which  direction  will  it  be  accel-
than
3.0 * 104 m(cid:2)s?
erated? What  if  it  is  moving  slower  than
(e) Now  consider  electrons  that  move  perpendicular  to
both  a  magnetic  field  and  to  an  electric  field, which  are
perpendicular to each other. If only electrons with speeds
of
go straight through undeflected, what is
the  ratio  of  the  magnitudes  of  electric  field  to  magnetic
field? Without knowing the value of the electric field, can
you know the value of the magnetic field?

3.0 * 104 m(cid:2)s,

5.5 * 104 m(cid:2)s

B
.
B

3. (a)  A  particle  of  charge  q moves  in  a  circular  path  of
radius r in a uniform magnetic field
If the magnitude of
the magnetic field is double, and the kinetic energy of the
particle is the same, how does the angular momentum of
the  particle  differ? (b)  Show  that  the  magnetic  dipole
moment M (Section  20–9)  of  an  electron  orbiting  the
proton nucleus of a hydrogen atom is related to the orbital
angular momentum L of the electron by
e
2m

M =

L.

91. You want to get an idea of the magnitude of magnetic fields
produced  by  overhead  power  lines. You  estimate  that  a
transmission wire is about 13 m above the ground. The local
power company tells you that the lines operate at 240 kV and
provide a maximum power of 46 MW. Estimate the magnetic
field you might experience walking under one such power
line, and compare to the Earth’s field.

92. Two long parallel wires 8.20 cm apart carry 19.2-A currents

in the same direction. Deter-
mine
field
the  magnetic
vector  at  a  point  P, 12.0 cm
from  one  wire  and  13.0 cm
from  the  other  (Fig. 20–74).
[Hint: Use the law of cosines;
see Appendix A or inside rear
cover.]

P

12.0 cm

13.0 cm

FIGURE 20–74
Problem 92.

8.20 cm

4. (a) Two long parallel wires, each 2.0 mm in diameter and
9.00 cm apart, carry equal 1.0-A currents in the same direc-
B
tion, Fig. 20–75. Determine  along the x axis between the
B
wires as a function
of x. (b)  Graph
B vs. x from
x = 1.0 mm
to
x = 89.0 mm
.

y

d = 9.00 cm

x

I

FIGURE 20–75
Search and Learn 4.

I

5. The force on a moving particle in a magnetic field is the idea
behind electromagnetic pumping. It can be used to pump
metallic  fluids  (such  as  sodium)  and  to  pump  blood  in
artificial  heart  machines. A  basic  design  is  shown  in
Fig. 20–76. For blood, an electric field is applied perpen-
dicular to a blood vessel and to the magnetic field. Explain
in  detail  how  ions  in  the  blood  are  caused  to  move. Do
positive  and  negative
ions feel a force in the
same direction?

+

FIGURE 20–76
Electromagnetic pumping
in a blood vessel.
Search and Learn 5.

e

S

N

B
F

−

A N S W E R S   T O   E X E R C I S E S

A: Near the poles, where the field lines are closer together.
B: Circles, pointing counterclockwise.
C: (b), (c), (d).
D: 0.15 N.
E: (b), (c), (d).

F: Zero.
G: Negative; the helical path would rotate in the opposite

direction (still going to the right).
0.8 * 10–5 T,
up.

H:

Search and Learn 589
