This comb has acquired a static
electric charge, either from
passing through hair, or being
rubbed by a cloth or paper towel.
The electrical charge on the
comb induces a polarization
(separation of charge) in scraps
of paper, and thus attracts them.

Our introduction to electricity
in this Chapter covers conductors
and insulators, and Coulomb’s
law which relates the force
between two point charges as a
function of their distance apart.
We also introduce the powerful
concept of electric field.

E

R

A P T

H

C

16

CONTENTS

16–1 Static Electricity; Electric

Charge and Its Conservation
16–2 Electric Charge in the Atom
16–3 Insulators and Conductors
16–4 Induced Charge;
the Electroscope
16–5 Coulomb’s Law
16–6 Solving Problems Involving
Coulomb’s Law and Vectors

16–7 The Electric Field
16–8 Electric Field Lines
16–9 Electric Fields and
Conductors

*16–10 Electric Forces in Molecular
Biology: DNA Structure and
Replication

*16–11 Photocopy Machines and

Computer Printers Use
Electrostatics
*16–12 Gauss’s Law

443

Electric Charge and
Electric Field

CHAPTER-OPENING QUESTION—Guess now!
Two  identical  tiny  spheres  have  the  same  electric  charge. If  their  separation  is
doubled, the force each exerts on the other will be

(a) half.
(b) double.
(c) four times larger.
(d) one-quarter as large.
(e) unchanged.

T he word “electricity” may evoke an image of complex modern technology:

lights, motors, electronics, and computers. But the electric force plays an
even deeper role in our lives. According to atomic theory, electric forces
between atoms and molecules hold them together to form liquids and solids, and
electric forces are also involved in the metabolic processes that occur within our
bodies. Many of the forces we have dealt with so far, such as elastic forces, the
normal force, and friction and other contact forces (pushes and pulls), are now
considered to result from electric forces acting at the atomic level. Gravity, on
the other hand, is a separate force.†

†As we discussed in Section 5–9, physicists in the twentieth century came to recognize four different
fundamental forces in nature: (1) gravitational force, (2) electromagnetic force (we will see later that
electric and magnetic forces are intimately related), (3) strong nuclear force, and (4) weak nuclear
force. The last two forces operate at the level of the nucleus of an atom. Recent theory has combined
the electromagnetic and weak nuclear forces so they are now considered to have a common origin
known as the electroweak force. We discuss the other forces in later Chapters.

The earliest studies on electricity date back to the ancients, but only since the
late 1700s has electricity been studied in detail. We will discuss the development
of  ideas  about  electricity, including  practical  devices, as  well  as  its  relation  to
magnetism, in the next seven Chapters.

16–1 Static Electricity; Electric Charge

and Its Conservation

The word electricity comes from the Greek word elektron, which means “amber.”
Amber is petrified tree resin, and the ancients knew that if you rub a piece of
amber with a cloth, the amber attracts small pieces of leaves or dust. A piece of
hard rubber, a glass rod, or a plastic ruler rubbed with a cloth will also display
this “amber effect,” or static electricity as we call it today. You can readily pick up
small pieces of paper with a plastic comb or ruler that you have just vigorously
rubbed with even a paper towel. See the photo on the previous page and Fig. 16–1.
You have probably experienced static electricity when combing your hair or when
taking a synthetic blouse or shirt from a clothes dryer. And you may have felt a
shock when you touched a metal doorknob after sliding across a car seat or walking
across a synthetic carpet. In each case, an object becomes “charged” as a result of
rubbing, and is said to possess a net electric charge.

Is all electric charge the same, or is there more than one type? In fact, there
are two types of electric charge, as the following simple experiments show. A plastic
ruler suspended by a thread is vigorously rubbed with a cloth to charge it. When
a second plastic ruler, which has been charged in the same way, is brought close
to the first, it is found that one ruler repels the other. This is shown in Fig. 16–2a.
Similarly, if  a  rubbed  glass  rod  is  brought  close  to  a  second  charged  glass  rod,
again a repulsive force is seen to act, Fig. 16–2b. However, if the charged glass
rod is brought close to the charged plastic ruler, it is found that they attract each
other, Fig. 16–2c. The charge on the glass must therefore be different from that on
the plastic. Indeed, it is found experimentally that all charged objects fall into one
of two categories. Either they are attracted to the plastic and repelled by the glass;
or they are repelled by the plastic and attracted to the glass. Thus there seem to be
two, and only two, types of electric charge. Each type of charge repels the same type
but attracts the opposite type. That is: unlike charges attract; like charges repel.
The two types of electric charge were referred to as positive and negative by
the American statesman, philosopher, and scientist Benjamin Franklin (1706–1790).
The choice of which name went with which type of charge was arbitrary. Franklin’s
choice set the charge on the rubbed glass rod to be positive charge, so the charge
on a rubbed plastic ruler (or amber) is called negative charge. We still follow this
convention today.

Franklin argued that whenever a certain amount of charge is produced on one
object, an equal amount of the opposite type of charge is produced on another
object. The positive and negative are to be treated algebraically, so during any
process, the net change in the amount of charge produced is zero. For example,
when a plastic ruler is rubbed with a paper towel, the plastic acquires a negative
charge and the towel acquires an equal amount of positive charge. The charges
are separated, but the sum of the two is zero.

This is an example of a law that is now well established: the law of conservation

of electric charge, which states that

the net amount of electric charge produced in any process is zero;

(a)

(b)

FIGURE 16–1 (a) Rub a plastic
ruler with a cloth or paper towel,
and (b) bring it close to some tiny
pieces of paper.

FIGURE 16–2 Like charges repel
one another; unlike charges attract.
(Note color coding: we color positive
charged objects pink or red, and
negative charges blue-green. We use
these colors especially for point
charges, but not always for real
objects.)

(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)

(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)

(cid:3)(cid:3)

(a) Two charged plastic rulers repel

(cid:2)(cid:2)(cid:2)(cid:2)(cid:2)(cid:2)

(cid:2)(cid:2)(cid:2)(cid:2)(cid:2)(cid:2)

(b) Two charged glass rods repel

(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)

(cid:2)(cid:2)(cid:2)(cid:2)(cid:2)(cid:2)

(c) Charged glass rod attracts
      charged plastic ruler

LAW OF CONSERVATION
OF ELECTRIC CHARGE

or, said another way,

no net electric charge can be created or destroyed.

If  one  object  (or  a  region  of  space)  acquires  a  positive  charge, then  an  equal
amount  of  negative  charge  will  be  found  in  neighboring  areas  or  objects. No
violations have ever been found, and the law of conservation of electric charge is
as firmly established as those for energy and momentum.

444 CHAPTER 16

16–2 Electric Charge in the Atom

Only within the past century has it become clear that an understanding of electric-
ity originates inside the atom itself. In later Chapters we will discuss atomic structure
and the ideas that led to our present view of the atom in more detail. But it will
help our understanding of electricity if we discuss it briefly now.

A simplified model of an atom shows it as having a tiny but massive, positively
charged nucleus surrounded by one or more negatively charged electrons (Fig. 16–3).
The nucleus contains protons, which are positively charged, and neutrons, which
have no net electric charge. All protons and all electrons have exactly the same
magnitude of electric charge; but their signs are opposite. Hence neutral atoms,
having no net charge, contain equal numbers of protons and electrons. Sometimes
an atom may lose one or more of its electrons, or may gain extra electrons, in which
case it will have a net positive or negative charge and is called an ion.

In solid materials the nuclei tend to remain close to fixed positions, whereas
some of the electrons may move quite freely. When an object is neutral, it contains
equal amounts of positive and negative charge. The charging of a solid object by
rubbing can be explained by the transfer of electrons from one object to the other.
When a plastic ruler becomes negatively charged by rubbing with a paper towel,
electrons are transferred from the towel to the plastic, leaving the towel with a
positive charge equal in magnitude to the negative charge acquired by the plastic.
In liquids and gases, nuclei or ions can move as well as electrons.

Normally when objects are charged by rubbing, they hold their charge only
for  a  limited  time  and  eventually  return  to  the  neutral  state. Where  does  the
charge go? Usually the excess charge “leaks off” onto water molecules in the air.
This is because water molecules are polar—that is, even though they are neutral,
their charge is not distributed uniformly, Fig. 16–4. Thus the extra electrons on,
say, a charged plastic ruler can “leak off” into the air because they are attracted
to the positive end of water molecules. A positively charged object, on the other
hand, can be neutralized by transfer of loosely held electrons from water mole-
cules in the air. On dry days, static electricity is much more noticeable since the
air contains fewer water molecules to allow leakage of charge. On humid or rainy
days, it is difficult to make any object hold a net charge for long.

16–3 Insulators and Conductors

Suppose we have two metal spheres, one highly charged and the other electrically
neutral (Fig. 16–5a). If we now place a metal object, such as a nail, so that it touches
both  spheres  (Fig. 16–5b), the  previously  uncharged  sphere  quickly  becomes
charged. If, instead, we had connected the two spheres by a wooden rod or a piece
of rubber (Fig. 16–5c), the uncharged ball would not become noticeably charged.
Materials like the iron nail are said to be conductors of electricity, whereas wood
and rubber are nonconductors or insulators.

Metals  are  generally  good  conductors, whereas  most  other  materials  are
insulators (although even insulators conduct electricity very slightly). Nearly all
natural  materials  fall  into  one  or  the  other  of  these  two  distinct  categories.
However, a few materials (notably silicon and germanium) fall into an intermediate
category known as semiconductors.

From  the  atomic  point  of  view, the  electrons  in  an  insulating  material  are
bound very tightly to the nuclei. In a good metal conductor, on the other hand,
some of the electrons are bound very loosely and can move about freely within the
metal (although they cannot leave the metal easily) and are often referred to as
free electrons or conduction electrons. When a positively charged object is brought
close to or touches a conductor, the free electrons in the conductor are attracted
by  this  positively  charged  object  and  move  quickly  toward  it. If  a  negatively
charged object is brought close to the conductor, the free electrons in the con-
ductor move swiftly away from it. In a semiconductor, there are many fewer free
electrons, and in an insulator, almost none.

(cid:3)

(cid:3)

(cid:2)(cid:2)
(cid:2)

(cid:3)

FIGURE 16–3 Simple model of the
atom.

FIGURE 16–4 Diagram of a water
molecule. Because it has opposite
charges on different ends, it is called
a “polar” molecule.

(cid:3)

(cid:3)

O

H

H

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

FIGURE 16–5 (a) A charged metal
sphere and a neutral metal sphere.
(b) The two spheres connected by a
conductor (a metal nail), which
conducts charge from one sphere to
the other. (c) The original two spheres
connected by an insulator (wood);
almost no charge is conducted.

Charged Neutral

++
+
+ + +

(a)

Metal

+
+ +

+
+ +

(b)

Wood

++
+
+ + +

(c)

SECTION 16–3 Insulators and Conductors

445

B

16–4 Induced Charge; the Electroscope

(a) Neutral metal rod

A

(cid:2)(cid:2)(cid:2)
(cid:2)(cid:2)
(cid:2)(cid:2)
Charged
metal object

e− passage

(cid:2)
(cid:2)

(cid:2)
(cid:2)

B

(b) Metal rod acquires
      charge by contact

FIGURE 16–6 A neutral metal rod
in (a) will acquire a positive charge
if placed in contact (b) with a
positively charged metal object.
(Electrons move as shown by the
green arrow.) This is called charging
by conduction.

Suppose  a  positively  charged  metal  object A  is  brought  close  to  an  uncharged
metal object B. If the two touch, the free electrons in the neutral one are attracted
to the positively charged object and some of those electrons will pass over to it,
Fig. 16–6. Since object B, originally neutral, is now missing some of its negative
electrons, it  will  have  a  net  positive  charge. This  process  is  called  charging  by
conduction, or “by  contact,” and  the  two  objects  end  up  with  the  same  sign  of
charge.

Now suppose a positively charged object is brought close to a neutral metal
rod, but does not touch it. Although the free electrons of the metal rod do not leave
the  rod, they  still  move  within  the  metal  toward  the  external  positive  charge,
leaving a positive charge at the opposite end of the rod (Fig. 16–7b). A charge is said
to have been induced at the two ends of the metal rod. No net charge has been created
in the rod: charges have merely been separated. The net charge on the metal rod
is still zero. However, if the metal is separated into two pieces, we would have two
charged  objects: one  charged  positively  and  one  charged  negatively. This  is
charging by induction.

(a)

Neutral metal rod

++
++

–
–
–

+
+
+

(b)

Metal rod still neutral, but
with a separation of charge

(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)(cid:2)
(cid:2)

(cid:3)
(cid:3)
(cid:3)

(a)

(b)

(cid:2)

(cid:3)

(cid:3)

(cid:3)

(cid:3)

(c)

FIGURE 16–7 Charging by induction:
if the rod in (b) is cut into two parts,
each part will have a net charge.

FIGURE 16–8 Inducing a
charge on an object connected
to ground.

Another way to induce a net charge on a metal object is to first connect it
with  a  conducting  wire  to  the  ground  (or  a  conducting  pipe  leading  into  the
ground) as shown in Fig. 16–8a (the symbol  means connected to “ground”).
The object is then said to be grounded or “earthed.” The Earth, because it is so
large and can conduct, easily accepts or gives up electrons; hence it acts like a
reservoir for charge. If a charged object—say negative this time—is brought up
close to the metal object, free electrons in the metal are repelled and many of
them move down the wire into the Earth, Fig. 16–8b. This leaves the metal posi-
tively charged. If the wire is now cut, the metal object will have a positive induced
charge  on  it  (Fig. 16–8c). If  the  wire  is  cut  after the  negative  object  is  moved
away, the electrons would all have moved from the ground back into the metal
object and it would be neutral again.

Charge separation can also be done in nonconductors. If you bring a positively
charged object close to a neutral nonconductor as shown in Fig. 16–9, almost no
electrons  can  move  about  freely  within  the  nonconductor. But  they  can  move
slightly within their own atoms and molecules. Each oval in Fig. 16–9 represents a
molecule (not to scale); the negatively charged electrons, attracted to the external
positive charge, tend to move in its direction within their molecules. Because the
negative charges in the nonconductor are nearer to the external positive charge,
the nonconductor as a whole is attracted to the external positive charge (see the
Chapter-Opening Photo, page 443).

An electroscope is a device that can be used for detecting charge. As shown in
Fig. 16–10, inside a case are two movable metal leaves, often made of gold foil,
connected to a metal knob on the outside. (Sometimes only one leaf is movable.)

FIGURE 16–9 A charged object
brought near a nonconductor causes
a charge separation within the
nonconductor’s molecules.

++
++
++

+–

+–
+–
+–
+–
Nonconductor

FIGURE 16–10 Electroscope.

Insulator

Metal

Gold
leaves

Glass

446 CHAPTER 16 Electric Charge and Electric Field

If a positively charged object is brought close to the knob, a separation of charge
is induced: electrons are attracted up into the knob, and the leaves become posi-
tively charged, Fig. 16–11a. The two leaves repel each other as shown, because they
are  both  positively  charged. If, instead, the  knob  is  charged  by  conduction
(touching), the whole apparatus acquires a net charge as shown in Fig. 16–11b.
In  either  case, the  greater  the  amount  of  charge, the  greater  the  separation  of
the leaves.

Note that you cannot tell the sign of the charge in this way, since negative
charge  will  cause  the  leaves  to  separate  just  as  much  as  an  equal  amount  of
positive charge; in either case, the two leaves repel each other. An electroscope
can, however, be used to determine the sign of the charge if it is first charged by
conduction: say, negatively, as in Fig. 16–12a. Now if a negative object is brought
close, as in Fig. 16–12b, more electrons are induced to move down into the leaves
and  they  separate  further. If  a  positive  charge  is  brought  close  instead, the
electrons are induced to flow upward, so the leaves are less negative and their
separation is reduced, Fig. 16–12c.

The  electroscope  was  used  in  the  early  studies  of  electricity. The  same
principle, aided  by  some  electronics, is  used  in  much  more  sensitive  modern
electrometers.

16–5 Coulomb’s Law

We have seen that an electric charge exerts a force of attraction or repulsion on
other electric charges. What factors affect the magnitude of this force? To find an
answer, the French physicist Charles Coulomb (1736–1806) investigated electric
forces in the 1780s using a torsion balance (Fig. 16–13) much like that used by
Cavendish for his studies of the gravitational force (Chapter 5).

Precise instruments for the measurement of electric charge were not available
in Coulomb’s time. Nonetheless, Coulomb was able to prepare small spheres with
different  magnitudes  of  charge  in  which  the  ratio of  the  charges  was  known.†
Although  he  had  some  difficulty  with  induced  charges, Coulomb  was  able  to
argue that the electric force one tiny charged object exerts on a second tiny charged
object is directly proportional to the charge on each of them. That is, if the charge
on either one of the objects is doubled, the force is doubled; and if the charge
on both of the objects is doubled, the force increases to four times the original
value. This was the case when the distance between the two charges remained the
same. If  the  distance  between  them  was  allowed  to  increase, he  found  that
the force decreased with the square of the distance between them. That is, if the
distance  was  doubled, the  force  fell  to  one-fourth  of  its  original  value. Thus,
Coulomb concluded, the magnitude of the force F that one small charged object
exerts  on  a  second  one  is  proportional  to  the  product  of  the  magnitude  of  the
charge  on  one,
and
inversely proportional to the square of the distance r between them (Fig. 16–14).
As an equation, we can write Coulomb’s law as

times  the  magnitude  of  the  charge  on  the  other,

2 ,

1 ,

Q

Q

(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)
(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)

(cid:2)
(cid:2)(cid:2)

(cid:3)

(cid:3) (cid:3)

(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)
(cid:3)

(cid:3)
(cid:3) (cid:3)

(a)

(b)

FIGURE 16–11 Electroscope charged
(a) by induction, (b) by conduction.

FIGURE 16–12 A previously
charged electroscope can be used to
determine the sign of a charged object.

(a)

(cid:2)(cid:2)(cid:2)(cid:2)(cid:2)(cid:2)

(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)

(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)

(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)

(cid:2)(cid:2)(cid:2)
(cid:2)(cid:2)
(cid:2)

(b)

(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)

(cid:2)(cid:2)(cid:2)(cid:2)(cid:2)

(cid:2)

(cid:2)(cid:2)(cid:2)(cid:2)(cid:2)

(cid:2)

(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)

(c)

(cid:2)(cid:2)(cid:2)(cid:2)(cid:2)(cid:2)(cid:2)(cid:2)(cid:2)
(cid:2)(cid:2)(cid:2)(cid:2)
(cid:2)

(cid:2) (cid:2)

FIGURE 16–13 Coulomb’s apparatus:
when an external charged sphere is
placed close to the charged one on the
suspended bar, the bar rotates slightly.
The suspending fiber resists the
twisting motion, and the angle of twist
is proportional to the force applied. With
this apparatus, Coulomb investigated
how the electric force varies as a
function of the magnitude of the charges
and of the distance between them.

Fiber

(cid:3)

(cid:3)

Rod

F = k

Q

Q
1
r2

2

,

where k is a proportionality constant.‡

†Coulomb reasoned that if a charged conducting sphere is placed in contact with an identical uncharged
sphere, the charge on the first would be shared equally by the two of them because of symmetry. He
thus had a way to produce charges equal to
‡The validity of Coulomb’s law today rests on precision measurements that are much more sophisticated
than Coulomb’s original experiment. The exponent 2 on r in Coulomb’s law has been shown to be
].
accurate to 1 part in

and so on, of the original charge.

26A1 * 10–16B

[that is,

1016

1
4 ,

1
2 ,

[magnitudes]

(16;1)

COULOMB’S LAW

FIGURE 16–14 Coulomb’s law,
Eq. 16–1, gives the force between two
point charges,
a distance r
and
apart.

2 ,

Q

Q

1

Q1

r

Q2

SECTION 16–5 Coulomb’s Law 447

= force on 1

F12
         due to 2
B
F

12

(cid:3)
1

= force on 2

F21
         due to 1
(cid:3)
2

B
F

21

B
F

12

(cid:2)

1

(cid:3)
1

(a)

(b)

B
F

12

B
F

21

(c)

B
F

21

(cid:2)

2

(cid:2)
2

FIGURE 16–15 The direction of the
static electric force one point charge
exerts on another is always along the
line joining the two charges, and
depends on whether the charges
have the same sign as in (a) and (b),
or opposite signs (c).

As we just saw, Coulomb’s law, Eq. 16–1,
Q

Q

F = k

2

,

1
r2

[magnitudes] (16;1)

gives the magnitude of the electric force that either charge exerts on the other.
The direction of the electric force is always along the line joining the two charges.
If the two charges have the same sign, the force on either charge is directed away
from the other (they repel each other). If the two charges have opposite signs,
the  force  on  one  is  directed  toward  the  other  (they  attract). See  Fig. 16–15.
Notice that the force one charge exerts on the second is equal but opposite to
that exerted by the second on the first, in accord with Newton’s third law.

The SI unit of charge is the coulomb (C). The precise definition of the coulomb
today is in terms of electric current and magnetic field, and will be discussed later
(Section 20–6). In SI units, the constant k in Coulomb’s law has the value

k = 8.988 * 109 N(cid:3)m2(cid:2)C2

or, when we only need two significant figures,

k L 9.0 * 109 N(cid:3)m2(cid:2)C2.

Thus, 1 C  is  that  amount  of  charge  which, if  placed  on  each  of  two  point
objects  that  are  1.0 m  apart, will  result  in  each  object  exerting  a  force  of
A9.0 * 109 N(cid:3)m2(cid:2)C2B(1.0 C)(1.0 C)(cid:2)(1.0 m)2 = 9.0 * 109 N
on  the  other. This
would be an enormous force, equal to the weight of almost a million tons. We
rarely encounter charges as large as a coulomb.†

Charges  produced  by  rubbing  ordinary  objects  (such  as  a  comb  or  plastic
or less. Objects that
ruler) are typically around a microcoulomb
carry  a  positive  charge  have  a  deficit  of  electrons, whereas  negatively  charged
objects have an excess of electrons. The charge on one electron has been deter-
mined to have a magnitude of about
and is negative. This is the
smallest charge observed in nature,‡ and because it is fundamental, it is given the
symbol e and is often referred to as the elementary charge:

1.6022 * 10–19 C,

A1 mC = 10–6 CB

e = 1.6022 * 10–19 C L  1.6 * 10–19 C.

–e.
Note that  e is defined as a positive number, so the charge on the electron is
) Since an object cannot gain or
(The charge on a proton, on the other hand, is
lose a fraction of an electron, the net charge on any object must be an integral
multiple of this charge. Electric charge is thus said to be quantized (existing only
in discrete amounts: 1e, 2e, 3e, etc.). Because e is so small, however, we normally
1013
do not notice this discreteness in macroscopic charges (
electrons), which thus seem continuous.

requires about

1 mC

±e.

F = Gm

(Eq. 5–4). Both are inverse square laws

(cid:2)r2,
m
Coulomb’s law looks a lot like the law of universal gravitation,
exerts on a
which expresses the magnitude of the gravitational force a mass
Both also have a
mass
proportionality to a property of each object—mass for gravity, electric charge for
electricity. And both act over a distance (that is, there is no need for contact).
A major difference between the two laws is that gravity is always an attractive force,
whereas the electric force can be either attractive or repulsive. Electric charge
comes in two types, positive and negative; gravitational mass is only positive.
(cid:2)
The constant k in Eq. 16–1 is often written in terms of another constant,

AF r 1(cid:2)r2B.

m

m

2

1

1

2

k = 1(cid:2)4p(cid:2)

0 .

0 ,
Coulomb’s

called the permittivity of free space. It is related to k by
law can be written

COULOMB’S LAW
)(cid:2)
0

(in terms of

where

F =

1
4p(cid:2)

0

Q

Q

1
r2

2

,

(cid:2)

0

=

1
4pk

= 8.85 * 10–12 C2(cid:2)N(cid:3)m2.

(16;2)

448 CHAPTER 16

†In the once common cgs system of units, k is set equal to 1, and the unit of electric charge is called the
electrostatic unit (esu) or the statcoulomb. One esu is defined as that charge, on each of two point
objects 1 cm apart, that gives rise to a force of 1 dyne.
‡According to the Standard Model of elementary particle physics, subnuclear particles called quarks
e
1
have a smaller charge than the electron, equal to
Quarks have not been detected directly as
3
isolated objects, and theory indicates that free quarks may not be detectable.

or

e.

2
3

0

0

(cid:2)

Equation  16–2  looks  more  complicated  than  Eq. 16–1, but  other  fundamental
equations we haven’t seen yet are simpler in terms of
rather than k. It doesn’t
matter which form we use since Eqs. 16–1 and 16–2 are equivalent. (The latest
(cid:2)
precise values of e and

are given inside the front cover.)†
Equations 16–1 and 16–2 apply to objects whose size is much smaller than
the  distance  between  them. Ideally, it  is  precise  for  point  charges (spatial  size
negligible compared to other distances). For finite-sized objects, it is not always
clear what value to use for r, particularly since the charge may not be distributed
uniformly on the objects. If the two objects are spheres and the charge is known
to be distributed uniformly on each, then r is the distance between their centers.
Coulomb’s law describes the force between two charges when they are at rest.
Additional  forces  come  into  play  when  charges  are  in  motion, and  will  be  dis-
cussed in later Chapters. In this Chapter we discuss only charges at rest, the study
of which is called electrostatics, and Coulomb’s law gives the electrostatic force.
When calculating with Coulomb’s law, we usually use magnitudes, ignoring
signs of the charges, and determine the direction of a force separately based on
whether the force is attractive or repulsive.

EXERCISE A Return to the Chapter-Opening Question, page 443, and answer it again
now. Try to explain why you may have answered differently the first time.

AQ
2

= ±eB

EXAMPLE 16;1
Electric force on electron by proton. Determine the
magnitude and direction of the electric force on the electron of a hydrogen
atom exerted by the single proton
that is the atom’s nucleus. Assume
the  average  distance  between  the  revolving  electron  and  the  proton  is
r = 0.53 * 10–10 m,
APPROACH To
F = k Q
have the same magnitude of charge, e, so
SOLUTION The magnitude of the force is
Q

law,
The electron and proton

r = 0.53 * 10–10 m.
Q

force  magnitude  we  use  Coulomb’s

Fig. 16–16.
the

(Eq. 16–1), with

= 1.6 * 10–19 C.

A9.0 * 109 N(cid:3)m2(cid:2)C2BA1.6 * 10–19 CBA1.6 * 10–19 CB
A0.53 * 10–10 mB2

F = k

find

= Q

1
r2

(cid:2)r2

Q

Q

=

2

2

1

2

1

= 8.2 * 10–8 N.

The  direction  of  the  force  on  the  electron  is  toward  the  proton, because  the
charges have opposite signs so the force is attractive.

P R O B L E M   S O L V I N G
Use magnitudes in Coulomb’s law;
find force direction from signs of charges

Proton
(cid:3)

Q2

r

B
F

Electron
Q1

(cid:2)

FIGURE 16–16 Example 16–1.

CONCEPTUAL EXAMPLE 16;2
Two positive point charges,
distance  Fig. 16–17. Which is larger in magnitude, the force that
on

Which charge exerts the greater force?
are separated by a
Q
exerts

or the force that

= 50 mC

exerts on

= 1 mC,

and

l,

Q

Q

Q

Q

Q

1

2

1

1 ?

2 ,

2

RESPONSE From Coulomb’s law, the force on
Q
1
l2

= k

F
12

Q

.

2

Q

exerted by

Q

is

2

1

The force on

Q

2

F
21

Q

is

1

exerted by
Q

1

= k

Q
2
l2

FIGURE 16–17 Example 16–2.
Q1
Q2

= 50 mC

= 1 mC

l

which is the same magnitude. The equation is symmetric with respect to the two
charges, so
NOTE Newton’s third law also tells us these two forces must have equal magnitude.

= F

F
21

12 .

EXERCISE B In Example 16–2, how is the direction of

F

12

related to the direction of F

21 ?

†Our  convention  for  units, such  as
C2(cid:2)N(cid:3)m2

C2(cid:2)(N(cid:3)m2)

(cid:2)
and does not mean AC2(cid:2)NB (cid:3)m2 = C2(cid:3)m2(cid:2)N.

C2(cid:2)N(cid:3)m2

means

means

for

m2

0 ,

is  in  the  denominator. That  is,

SECTION 16–5 Coulomb’s Law 449

Keep  in  mind  that  Coulomb’s  law, Eq. 16–1  or  16–2, gives  the  force  on  a
charge due to only one other charge. If several (or many) charges are present, the
net force on any one of them will be the vector sum of the forces due to each of the
others. This principle of superposition is based on experiment, and tells us that
electric force vectors add like any other vector. For example, if you have a system
of four charges, the net force on charge 1, say, is the sum of the forces exerted on
charge 1 by charges 2, 3, and 4. The magnitudes of these three forces are determined
from Coulomb’s law, and then are added vectorially.

B
F
1

16–6 Solving Problems Involving
Coulomb’s Law and Vectors

B
F
2

(a) Two forces acting on an object.

The electric force between charged particles at rest (sometimes referred to as the
electrostatic force or as the Coulomb force) is, like all forces, a vector: it has both
2 ,
magnitude and direction. When several forces act on an object (call them
on the object is the vector sum of all the forces acting on it:
etc.), the net force
B

1 , F

B
F

net

B

B

B
F
B
net = F
F
1

+ F
2

+ p

.

B
F
1

B
+
B F
(=F
B F
1

2)

B

F2

This is the principle of superposition for forces. We studied how to add vectors in
Chapter 3; then in Chapter 4 we used the rules for adding vectors to obtain the
net force on an object by adding the different vector forces acting on it. It might
be useful now to review Sections 3–2, 3–3, and 3–4. Here is a brief review of vectors.

(b) The total, or net, force is
B
+
F
2

B
F
method of adding vectors.

by the tail-to-tip

B
=
F
1

B
F
1

B
+
B F
(=
B F
1
F

2)

B
F
2
B
=
F
1

B
F

B
+
2 by the
F
(c)
      parallelogram method.

+y

B
F

1y

B
F

2y

B

1F

θ
1

θ
2

B
F
2

−x

B
F
1x
B
F

2x

+x

−y
B
(d)    1 and 2 resolved into their
F
       x and y components.

B
F

FIGURE 16–18 Review of vector
addition.

2 ,

B
F

and

Vector Addition Review
B
act on an object (Fig. 16–18a). They can be
F
Suppose two vector forces,
1
added using the tail-to-tip method (Fig. 16–18b) or by the parallelogram method
(Fig. 16–18c), as  discussed  in  Section  3–2. These  two  methods  are  useful  for
understanding a  given  problem  (for  getting  a  picture  in  your  mind  of  what  is
going on). But for calculating the direction and magnitude of the resultant sum, it
is more precise to use the method of adding components. Figure 16–18d shows
resolved  into  components  along  chosen  x and y axes  (for
the  forces
more details, see Section 3–4). From the definitions of the trigonometric functions
(Figs. 3–11 and 3–12), we have
1 cos u
F
1 sin u

    F
    F

2 cos u

2 sin u

= –F

= F

= F

= F

and

B
F
2

B
F
1

2 .

F

1x

2x

1

2

1

1y

2y

We add up the x and y components separately to obtain the components of the
resultant force  which are

B
,
F

F
x
F
y

= F

1x

= F

1y

+ F

2x

+ F

2y

= F

= F

1 cos u
1 sin u

1

1

+ F

- F

2 cos u
2 ,
2 sin u
2 .

The magnitude of the resultant (or net) force

B
F

is

F = 3F

2 + F
x

2 .
y

The direction of
given by

B
F

u
is specified by the angle

that  makes with the x axis, which is

B
F

tan u =

F
y
F
x

.

Adding Electric Forces; Principle of Superposition
When dealing with several charges, it is helpful to use double subscripts on each
of the forces involved. The first subscript refers to the particle on which the force
acts; the  second  refers  to  the  particle  that  exerts  the  force. For  example, if  we
have three charges,

means the force exerted on particle 3 by particle 1.

B
F

31

450 CHAPTER 16 Electric Charge and Electric Field

As in all problem solving, it is very important to draw a diagram, in particular
a free-body diagram (Chapter 4) for each object, showing all the forces acting on
that object. In applying Coulomb’s law, we can deal with charge magnitudes only
(leaving  out  minus  signs)  to  get  the  magnitude  of  each  force. Then  determine
separately  the  direction  of  the  force  physically  (along  the  line  joining  the  two
particles: like charges repel, unlike charges attract), and show the force on the
diagram. (You could determine direction first if you like.) Finally, add all the forces
on one object together as vectors to obtain the net force on that object.

EXAMPLE 16;3
Three  charges  in  a  line. Three  charged  particles  are
arranged in a line, as shown in Fig. 16–19a. Calculate the net electrostatic force
on particle 3 (the
APPROACH The  net  force  on  particle  3  is  the  vector  sum  of  the  force
exerted on particle 3 by particle 1 and the force

31
exerted on 3 by particle 2:

on the right) due to the other two charges.

–4.0 mC

B
F

B
F

32

B = F
F

B

31

B

+ F

32 .

SOLUTION The magnitudes of these two forces are obtained using Coulomb’s
law, Eq. 16–1:

F
31

= k

1

Q

Q
3
r
2
31

=

A9.0 * 109 N(cid:3)m2(cid:2)C2BA4.0 * 10–6 CBA8.0 * 10–6 CB
(0.50 m)2

= 1.2 N,

where

r
31

= 0.50 m

is the distance from

Q

Q

to

1 .

3

Similarly,

F
32

= k

2

Q

Q
3
r
2
32

=

A9.0 * 109 N(cid:3)m2(cid:2)C2BA4.0 * 10–6 CBA3.0 * 10–6 CB
(0.20 m)2

= 2.7 N.

Since we were calculating the magnitudes of the forces, we omitted the signs of
the charges. But we must be aware of them to get the direction of each force.
Let the line joining the particles be the x axis, and we take it positive to the right.
is attractive, the directions of the forces
Then, because
are as shown in Fig. 16–19b:
)
1
and
). The  net  force  on
particle 3 is then

points  in  the  negative  x direction  (toward

points in the positive x direction (away from

is repulsive and

F
32

B
F

B
F

Q

Q

F

31

31

32

2

F = –F
32

+ F
31

= –2.7 N + 1.2 N = –1.5 N.

Q

The magnitude of the net force is 1.5 N, and it points to the left.
NOTE Charge
principle  of  superposition). That  is, the  charge  in  the  middle,
blocks the effect of charge
on Q

acts  on  charge

Naturally,

acting on

just  as  if

Q
1

3 .

Q

Q

Q

2

1

3

2

were  not  there  (this  is  the
Q
in  no  way
exerts its own force

2 ,

Q

3 .

0.30 m

0.20 m

(cid:2)
=
  Q1
−8.0    C
m

y

x

x

(cid:2)
=
  Q3
−4.0    C
m

(cid:3)
=
  Q2
+3.0    C
m
(a)

B
B
F

31

B
B
F

32

(cid:2)
Q3
(b)

FIGURE 16–19 Example 16–3.

C A U T I O N
Each charge exerts its own force.
No charge blocks the effect of
the others

EXERCISE C Determine the magnitude and direction of the net force on charge
Fig. 16–19a.

Q
2

in

SECTION 16–6 Solving Problems Involving Coulomb’s Law and Vectors

451

32

B
F

is repulsive

FIGURE 16–20 Determining the
forces for Example 16–4. (a) The
directions of the individual forces
are as shown because
Q
(the force on
3
Q
because
away from
both positive) whereas
Q
Q
attractive  (
3
1
B
points toward
signs), so
F
31
B
(b) Adding
F
B
net force F
.

Q
3
B
F
have opposite
Q
1 .
to obtain the

is in the direction

and
is

and

are

to

B
F

Q

31

32

31

2

2

y

B
F

32

Q3

m

= +65    C
F31y

F31x

30°

B
F

31

m
c

0
3

90°

Q2

= +50    C

m

y

B
F

32

B
F

60 cm

30°

x
= −86     C
m

Q1

52 cm

(a)

Q3

u

B
F

31

x

(b)

EXAMPLE 16;4
net electrostatic force on charge
Q

Q

and

1

2 .

Electric force using vector components. Calculate the
shown in Fig. 16–20a due to the charges

Q

3

31

2 .

B
F

B
F

and

The  forces

Q
32
exerts an attractive force on
B
F
32
and

APPROACH We  use  Coulomb’s  law  to  find  the  magnitudes  of  the  individual
Q
forces. The direction of each force will be along the line connecting
1
have  the  directions  shown  in  Fig. 16–20a, since
or
Q
Q
1
and
B
F
SOLUTION The magnitudes of
since we know the directions)

31
are not along the same line, so to find the resultant force on  we resolve
B
F

3
into x and y components and perform the vector addition.

exerts a repulsive force. The forces

are (ignoring signs of the charges

and

and

to

B
F

B
F

B
F

3 ,

Q

Q

Q

31

31

32

32

2

3

F
31

= k

F
32

= k

Q

Q

3
r
2
31

Q

Q

3
r
2
32

1

=

2

=

A9.0 * 109 N(cid:3)m2(cid:2)C2BA6.5 * 10–5 CBA8.6 * 10–5 CB
(0.60 m)2

= 140 N,

A9.0 * 109 N(cid:3)m2(cid:2)C2BA6.5 * 10–5 CBA5.0 * 10–5 CB
(0.30 m)2

= 325 N.

(We keep 3 significant figures until the end, and then keep 2 because only 2 are
given.) We resolve
into its components along the x and y axes, as shown in
Fig. 16–20a:

B
F

31

F

31x

F

31y

= F

31 cos 30° = (140 N) cos 30° = 120 N,

= –F

31 sin 30° = –(140 N) sin 30° = –70 N.

The force

B
F

32

has only a y component. So the net force  on

B
F

Q

has components

3

F
x
F
y

= F

31x

= 120 N,

= F
32

+ F

31y

= 325 N - 70 N = 255 N.

The magnitude of the net force is

F = 3F

2 + F
x
and it acts at an angle  (see Fig. 16–20b) given by

u

2 = 3(120 N)2 + (255 N)2 = 280 N;
y

tan u =

F
y
F
x
u = tan–1(2.13) = 65°.
B
F

= 255 N
120 N

= 2.13,

B
F

so
NOTE Because
is
not equal to the sum (or difference as in Example 16–3) of the separate magni-
F
32 ;
tudes. That is,
Instead
3
we had to do vector addition.

are not along the same line, the magnitude of

nor does it equal

is not equal to

and

- F

+ F

F
31

F
32

B
F
3

31 .

31

32

452 CHAPTER 16 Electric Charge and Electric Field

y

B
F

=

B
F

+

B
F

32

31

u = 65°

Q3

115°

x

r (cid:4) ?

B
F

34

Q4

FIGURE 16–21 Example 16–5 and
Exercise D:
makes the net force on

AF
34
zero.

exerts force

Q

Q

B

B

4

that

3

FIGURE 16–22 An electric field
surrounds every charge. The red
lines indicate the electric field
extending out from charge Q, and
P is an arbitrary point.

P

Q

FIGURE 16–23 Force exerted by
charge
placed at points A, B, and C.

on a small test charge, q,

±Q

B
F
A

A
+Q

C

B
F

C

(16;3)

B

B
F

B

CONCEPTUAL EXAMPLE 16;5
where could you place a fourth charge,
Q

would be zero?

3

Make the force on

Q

4

= –50 mC,

zero. In Fig. 16–20,
Q3
so that the net force on

RESPONSE By the principle of superposition, we need a force in exactly the
opposite  direction  to  the  resultant
that  we  calculated  in
Example 16–4, Fig. 16–20b. Our force must have magnitude 290 N, and must
B
.
F
point down and to the left of
So  must be along this line. See Fig. 16–21.

in Fig. 16–20b, in the direction opposite to

due  to

and

B
F

Q

Q

Q

2

1

3

Q
4

EXERCISE D In Example 16–5, what distance r must

Q

be from Q

3 ?

4

EXERCISE E (a) Consider two point charges,
which are fixed a distance d
apart. Can you find a location where a third positive charge Q could be placed so that
the net electric force on this third charge is zero? (b) What if the first two charges were
both ±Q?

±Q and  –Q,

16–7 The Electric Field

Many common forces might be referred to as “contact forces,” such as your hands
pushing or pulling a cart, or a tennis racket hitting a tennis ball.

Q

Q

to produce the force on

In contrast, both the gravitational force and the electrical force act over a dis-
tance: there is a force between two objects even when the objects are not touching.
The  idea  of  a  force  acting  at  a  distance was  a  difficult  one  for  early  thinkers.
Newton himself felt uneasy with this idea when he published his law of universal
gravitation. A helpful way to look at the situation uses the idea of the field, devel-
oped by the British scientist Michael Faraday (1791–1867). In the electrical case,
according  to  Faraday, an  electric  field extends  outward  from  every  charge  and
permeates all of space (Fig. 16–22). If a second charge (call it
) is placed near
2
the first charge, it feels a force exerted by the electric field that is there (say, at
point P in Fig. 16–22). The electric field at point P is considered to interact directly
Q
with charge

2 .
We  can  in  principle  investigate  the  electric  field  surrounding  a  charge  or
group of charges by measuring the force on a small positive test charge which is
at rest. By a test charge we mean a charge so small that the force it exerts does
not  significantly  affect  the  charges  that  create  the  field. If  a  tiny  positive  test
charge q is placed at various locations in the vicinity of a single positive charge Q
as shown in Fig. 16–23 (points A, B, C), the force exerted on q is as shown. The
force at B is less than at A because B’s distance from Q is greater (Coulomb’s
law); and the force at C is smaller still. In each case, the force on q is directed
radially away from Q. The electric field is defined in terms of the force on such a
positive test charge. In particular, the electric field,
at any point in space is
defined as the force  exerted on a tiny positive test charge placed at that point
divided by the magnitude of the test charge q:

B
,
E

B
F

2

B

B = F
E
q

.

B
E

B(cid:2)q
F

is defined as the limit of

as q is taken smaller and smaller,
More precisely,
approaching  zero. That  is, q is  so  tiny  that  it  exerts  essentially  no  force  on  the
other charges which created the field. From this definition (Eq. 16–3), we see that
the electric field at any point in space is a vector whose direction is the direction
of the force on a tiny positive test charge at that point, and whose magnitude is
the force per unit charge. Thus  has SI units of newtons per coulomb
B(cid:2)q
F

) is so that  does not depend
(with
on the magnitude of the test charge q. This means that  describes only the effect
of the charges creating the electric field at that point.

B
E
The reason for defining  as

q S 0

(N(cid:2)C).

B
E

B
E

B
E

SECTION 16–7 The Electric Field 453

The electric field at any point in space can be measured, based on the definition,
B
Eq. 16–3. For simple situations with one or several point charges, we can calculate
E
.
For example, the electric field at a distance r from a single point charge Q would
have magnitude

E =

F
q

=

kqQ(cid:2)r2
q

E = k

Q
r2 ;

(cid:2)
or, in terms of  as in Eq. 16–2
0

Ak = 1(cid:2)4p(cid:2)
0

B:

E =

1
4p(cid:2)
0

Q

r2

.

[single point charge]

(16;4a)

[single point charge]

(16;4b)

Notice that E is independent of the test charge q—that is, E depends only on the
charge Q which  produces  the  field, and  not  on  the  value  of  the  test  charge  q.
Equations 16–4 are referred to as the electric field form of Coulomb’s law.
B
E

If we are given the electric field  at a given point in space, then we can calcu-

late the force on any charge q placed at that point by writing (see Eq. 16–3):

(16;5)
This is valid even if q is not small as long as q does not cause the charges creating
B
E
and  point in the same direction. If q is negative,
B
F

B
F
to move. If q is positive,
and  point in opposite directions. See Fig. 16–24.

B
E

B
E

B
F
B = qE
.
F

B

EXAMPLE 16;6
Photocopy machine. A photocopy machine works by
arranging positive charges (in the pattern to be copied) on the surface of a drum,
then gently sprinkling negatively charged dry toner (ink) particles onto the drum.
The toner particles temporarily stick to the pattern on the drum (Fig. 16–25) and
are later transferred to paper and “melted” to produce the copy. Suppose each
toner particle has a mass of
and carries an average of 20 extra
electrons to provide an electric charge. Assuming that the electric force on a
toner particle must exceed twice its weight in order to ensure sufficient attraction,
compute the required electric field strength near the surface of the drum.
F = qE,
APPROACH The electric force on a toner particle of charge
where E is the needed electric field. This force needs to be at least as great as
twice the weight (mg) of the particle.
SOLUTION The minimum value of electric field satisfies the relation

9.0 * 10–16 kg

q = 20e

is

qE = 2mg

where

q = 20e.

Hence

E =

2mg
q

=

2A9.0 * 10–16 kgBA9.8 m(cid:2)s2B
20A1.6 * 10–19 CB

= 5.5 * 103 N(cid:2)C.

EXAMPLE 16;7
Electric field of a single point charge. Calculate the
magnitude and direction of the electric field at a point P which is 30 cm to the
right of a point charge
APPROACH The magnitude of the electric field due to a single point charge is
given by Eq. 16–4. The direction is found using the sign of the charge Q.
SOLUTION The magnitude of the electric field is:

Q = –3.0 * 10–6 C.

E = k

Q

r2

=

A9.0 * 109 N(cid:3)m2(cid:2)C2BA3.0 * 10–6 CB
(0.30 m)2

= 3.0 * 105 N(cid:2)C.

The direction of the electric field is toward the charge Q, to the left as shown in
Fig. 16–26a, since we defined the direction as that of the force on a positive test
charge which here would be attractive. If Q had been positive, the electric field
would have pointed away, as in Fig. 16–26b.
NOTE There is no electric charge at point P. But there is an electric field there.
The only real charge is Q.

B
E

B
E
B
F

B
E

(a)

(b)

(c)

+ q

– q

B
F

FIGURE 16–24 (a) Electric field at
a given point in space. (b) Force on a
positive charge at that point. (c) Force
on a negative charge at that point.

P H Y S I C S   A P P L I E D
Photocopier

Surface of
drum

B
E
Toner particles
held to drum surface
by electric ﬁeld E

B

FIGURE 16–25 Example 16–6.

FIGURE 16–26 Example 16–7.
Electric field at point P (a) due to a
negative charge Q, and (b) due to a
positive charge Q, each 30 cm from P.

30 cm

Q = −3.0 × 10–6 C

P

E = 3.0 × 105 N/C

(a)

Q = +3.0 × 10–6 C

P

E = 3.0 × 105 N/C

(b)

454 CHAPTER 16

This Example illustrates a general result: The electric field
due to a positive
charge points away from the charge, whereas  due to a negative charge points
toward that charge.

B
E

B
E

EXERCISE  F Find the magnitude and direction of the electric field due to a
charge 50 cm below it.

–2.5 mC

If the electric field at a given point in space is due to more than one charge,
etc.) due to each charge are added vecto-

B
E

B

2 ,
the individual fields (call them
rially to get the total field at that point:
B = E
E

+ p

+ E

1 , E

B

B

.

1

2

The validity of this superposition principle for electric fields is fully confirmed by
experiment.

B
E

±50 mC.

EXAMPLE 16;8
at a point between two charges. Two point charges
are separated by a distance of 10.0 cm. One has a charge of
and the
(a) Determine the direction and magnitude of the electric field at
other
a point P between the two charges that is 2.0 cm from the negative charge
(Fig. 16–27a). (b) If an electron
is placed at rest at P
and then released, what will be its initial acceleration (direction and magnitude)?

(mass = 9.11 * 10–31 kg)

–25 mC

Q1 = –25    C

m

P

r1 = 2.0 cm

Q1

B
E
1

B
E

2

r2 = 8.0 cm

(a)

(b)

Q2 = +50    Cm

Q2

FIGURE 16–27 Example 16–8. In (b),
we don’t know the relative lengths of
B
until we do the calculation.
E

and

B
E

1

2

2 .

Q
1

and

The field due to the negative charge
Q

APPROACH The electric field at P will be the vector sum of the fields created
Q
1 ,
separately by
and  the  field  due  to  the  positive  charge
Thus  both
fields point to the left as shown in Fig. 16–27b, and we can add the magnitudes
of the two fields together algebraically, ignoring the signs of the charges. In (b) we
B
B = q©E
.
use Newton’s second law
SOLUTION (a) Each  field  is  due  to  a  point  charge  as  given  by  Eq. 16–4,
E = k Q(cid:2)r2.
The total field points to the left and has magnitude

to find the acceleration, where

points  away  from

points toward

B = maB)

(©F

©F

2 .

Q

Q

Q

1

2

E = k

Q
1
2
1

r

+ k

Q
2
2
2

r

= k a

Q

1
2
1

r

+

Q

2
2
2

r

b

= A9.0 * 109 N(cid:3)m2(cid:2)C2B ¢ 25 * 10–6 C
A2.0 * 10–2 mB2
= 6.3 * 108 N(cid:2)C.

+

50 * 10–6 C
A8.0 * 10–2 mB2

≤

(b) The electric field points to the left, so the electron will feel a force to the
(Newton’s
right since it is negatively charged. Therefore the acceleration
second law) will be to the right. The force on a charge q in an electric field E is
(Eq. 16–5). Hence the magnitude of the electron’s initial acceleration is
F = qE

a = F(cid:2)m

a =

F
m

=

qE
m

=

A1.60 * 10–19 CBA6.3 * 108 N(cid:2)CB
9.11 * 10–31 kg

= 1.1 * 1020 m(cid:2)s2.

NOTE By considering the directions of each field (
) before doing any
calculations, we made sure our calculation could be done simply and correctly.

and

1

2

B
E

B
E

EXERCISE G Four charges of equal magnitude, but possibly different sign, are placed on
the corners of a square. What arrangement of charges will produce an electric field with
the greatest magnitude at the center of the square? (a) All four positive charges; (b) all
four  negative  charges; (c)  three  positive  and  one  negative; (d)  two  positive  and  two
negative; (e) three negative and one positive.

SECTION 16–7 The Electric Field 455

y

B
E

A2

A

B
E

A

f

30°

B
E

A1

30 cm

60 cm

52 cm

30°
Q1

x
= −50    C

m

m

= +50    C

Q2
FIGURE 16–28 Calculation of the
electric field at point A, Example 16–9.

P R O B L E M   S O L V I N G
Ignore signs of charges and
determine direction physically,
showing directions on diagram

B
E

above two point charges. Calculate the total electric
Q

EXAMPLE 16;9
field at point A in Fig. 16–28 due to both charges,
APPROACH The  calculation  is  much  like  that  of  Example  16–4, except  now
we are dealing with electric fields instead of force. The electric field at point A
is the vector sum of the fields
due to  We find the
due to
magnitude  of  the  field  produced  by  each  point  charge, then  we  add  their
components to find the total field at point A.
SOLUTION The magnitude of the electric field produced at point A by each of
E = kQ(cid:2)r2,
the charges

is given by

and

and

and

B
E

B
E

so

2 .

1 ,

2 .

Q

Q

Q

Q

Q

A1

A2

1

1

2

EA1 =

EA2 =

A9.0 * 109 N(cid:3)m2(cid:2)C2BA50 * 10–6 CB
(0.60 m)2
A9.0 * 109 N(cid:3)m2(cid:2)C2BA50 * 10–6 CB
(0.30 m)2

= 1.25 * 106 N(cid:2)C,

= 5.0 * 106 N(cid:2)C.

EA1

The direction of
points from A away from
components

points from A toward

as shown; so the total electric field at A,

(negative charge), whereas
A ,

B
E

Q

2 ,

Q
1

EA2
has

EAx
EAy

= EA1 cos 30° = 1.1 * 106 N(cid:2)C,
= EA2 - EA1 sin 30° = 4.4 * 106 N(cid:2)C.

Thus the magnitude of

B
E
A

is

EA = 3(1.1)2 + (4.4)2 * 106 N(cid:2)C = 4.5 * 106 N(cid:2)C,

and its direction is
so f = 76°.

f

(Fig. 16–28) given by

tan f = EAy

(cid:2)EAx

= 4.4(cid:2)1.1 = 4.0,

It is worthwhile summarizing here what we have learned about solving electrostatics
problems.

SOLV ING

M
E
L
B
O
R
P

Electrostatics: Electric Forces and
Electric Fields
Whether you use electric field or electrostatic forces, the
procedure for solving electrostatics problems is similar:
1. Draw a careful diagram—namely, a free-body dia-
gram for each object, showing all the forces acting
on that object, or showing the electric field at a point
due to all significant charges present. Determine the
direction of  each  force  or  electric field  physically:
like charges repel each other, unlike charges attract;
charge, and  toward  a
fields  point  away  from  a

±

- charge. Show and label each vector force or field
on your diagram.

2. Apply Coulomb’s law to calculate the magnitude of
the force that each contributing charge exerts on a
charged object, or the magnitude of the electric field
each charge produces at a given point. Deal only with
magnitudes of charges (leaving out minus signs), and
obtain the magnitude of each force or electric field.
3. Add  vectorially all  the  forces  on  an  object, or  the
contributing fields at a point, to get the resultant. Use
symmetry (say, in the geometry) whenever possible.

B
E

equidistant above two point charges. Figure 16–29 (top
EXAMPLE 16;10
of next page) is the same as Fig. 16–28 but includes point B, which is equidistant
Calculate the total electric field at point B in Fig. 16–29
(40 cm) from
and
due to both charges,
and
APPROACH We  explicitly  follow  the  steps  of  the  Problem  Solving  Strategy
above.

Q
Q

2 .
1

2 .

Q

Q

1

456 CHAPTER 16 Electric Charge and Electric Field

B

A2E

A

B

AE

f

30°

B

A1E

30 cm

B

B2E

60 cm

B

u

B

B1E

30 cm

B

BE

40 cm

Q2

= +50    C

m

26 cm

26 cm

u

Q1

x
m
= −50    C

FIGURE 16–29 Same as Fig. 16–28
but with point B added. Calculation
of the electric field at points A and B
for Examples 16–9 and 16–10.

SOLUTION
1. Draw a careful diagram. The directions of the electric fields

B
E

well as the net field
2 ;
positive charge

Q

B ,

B1

are shown in Fig. 16–29.
points toward the negative charge

B2

Q

1 .

B
E
B
E

as
points away from the

and

B2 ,

B1

B
E

B
E

2. Apply  Coulomb’s  law to  find  the  magnitudes  of  the  contributing  electric
fields. Because  B  is  equidistant  from  the  two  equal  charges  (40 cm  by  the
are the same; that is,
Pythagorean theorem), the magnitudes of

and

EB2

EB1

EB1 = EB2 =

kQ

r2

=

A9.0 * 109 N(cid:3)m2(cid:2)C2BA50 * 10–6 CB
(0.40 m)2

= 2.8 * 106 N(cid:2)C.

3. Add  vectorially, and  use  symmetry when  possible. The  y components  of
are  equal  and  opposite. Because  of  this  symmetry, the  total
From

B
E
is horizontal and equals

EB1 cos u + EB2 cos u = 2 EB1 cos u.

B2

 cos u = 26 cm(cid:2)40 cm = 0.65.

Then

and
EB

B
E
B1
field
Fig. 16–29,

EB = 2EB1 cos u = 2A2.8 * 106 N(cid:2)CB(0.65)

= 3.6 * 106 N(cid:2)C,

and the direction of

B
E

is along the

B

±x

direction.

16–8 Electric Field Lines

Since the electric field is a vector, it is sometimes referred to as a vector field. We
could indicate the electric field with arrows at various points in a given situation,
such as at A, B, and C in Fig. 16–30. The directions of
are the
same  as  for  the  forces  shown  earlier  in  Fig. 16–23, but  the  magnitudes  (arrow
B
F
lengths)  are  different  since  we  divide
by  q to  get  However, the  relative
are the same as for the forces since we divide by the
lengths of
same q each  time. To  indicate  the  electric  field  in  such  a  way  at  many points,
however, would result in many arrows, which would quickly become cluttered and
confusing. To avoid this, we use another technique, that of field lines.

and

and

B
.
E

B
E

B
E

B
E

B
E

B
E

B
E

A ,

A ,

B ,

B ,

C

C

To visualize the electric field, we draw a series of lines to indicate the direction
of the electric field at various points in space. These electric field lines (or lines of
force) are drawn to indicate the direction of the force due to the given field on a
positive test charge. The lines of force due to a single isolated positive charge are
shown in Fig. 16–31a, and for a single isolated negative charge in Fig. 16–31b. In
part (a) the lines point radially outward from the charge, and in part (b) they point
radially inward toward the charge because that is the direction the force would be
on a positive test charge in each case (as in Fig. 16–26). Only a few representative
lines are shown. We could draw lines in between those shown since the electric field
exists there as well. We can draw the lines so that the number of lines starting on a
positive charge, or ending on a negative charge, is proportional to the magnitude
of  the  charge. Notice  that  nearer  the  charge, where  the  electric  field  is  greater
AF r 1(cid:2)r2B,
the  lines  are  closer  together. This  is  a  general  property  of  electric
field  lines: the  closer  together  the  lines  are, the  stronger  the  electric  field  in  that
region. In fact, field lines can be drawn so that the number of lines crossing unit
area perpendicular to

is proportional to the magnitude of the electric field.

B
E

P R O B L E M   S O L V I N G

Use symmetry to save work,
when possible

B
E

A

A

+Q

B

B
E

B

C

B
E

C

FIGURE 16–30 Electric field vector,
shown at three points, due to a
single point charge Q. (Compare to
Fig. 16–23.)

FIGURE 16–31 Electric field lines
(a) near a single positive point
charge, (b) near a single negative
point charge.

+

(a)

–

(b)

SECTION 16–8 457

B
E

P

(cid:2)

(cid:3)

(a)

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

(b)

±2Q

Figure  16–32a  shows  the  electric  field  lines  due  to  two  equal  charges  of
opposite sign, a combination known as an electric dipole. The electric field lines
are curved in this case and are directed from the positive charge to the negative
charge. The direction of the electric field at any point is tangent to the field line at
B
E
that point as shown by the vector arrow  at point P. To satisfy yourself that this
is the correct pattern for the electric field lines, you can make a few calculations
such as those done in Examples 16–9 and 16–10 for just this case (see Fig. 16–29).
Figure 16–32b shows the electric field lines for two equal positive charges, and
Fig. 16–32c  for  unequal  charges,
Note  that  twice  as  many  lines
and
leave
(number  of  lines  is  proportional  to  magnitude  of  Q).
as  enter
Finally, in  Fig. 16–32d, we  see  in  cross  section  the  field  lines  between  two  flat
parallel plates carrying equal but opposite charges. Notice that the electric field
lines between the two plates start out perpendicular to the surface of the metal
plates (we will see why this is true in the next Section) and go directly from one
plate to the other, as we expect because a positive test charge placed between
the  plates  would  feel  a  strong  repulsion  from  the  positive  plate  and  a  strong
attraction  to  the  negative  plate. The  field  lines  between  two  close  plates  are
parallel  and  equally  spaced  in  the  central  region, but  fringe  outward  near  the
edges. Thus, in the central region, the electric field has the same magnitude at
all points, and we can write

±2Q.

–Q

–Q

(cid:3)

–Q

(cid:2)(cid:2)

+2Q

E = constant.

c between two closely spaced, oppositely
charged, flat parallel plates

d

(16;6)

(c)

(cid:6)Q
+

(cid:5)Q
−

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

−

−

−

−

−

−

−

(d)

FIGURE 16–32 Electric field lines
for four arrangements of charges.

FIGURE 16–33 The Earth’s
gravitational field, which at any
point is directed toward the Earth’s
center (the force on any mass points
toward the Earth’s center).

The fringing of the field near the edges can often be ignored, particularly if the
separation of the plates is small compared to their height and width.† We summarize
the properties of field lines as follows:

1. Electric field lines indicate the direction of the electric field; the field points

in the direction tangent to the field line at any point.

2. The lines are drawn so that the magnitude of the electric field, E, is propor-
tional  to  the  number  of  lines  crossing  unit  area  perpendicular  to  the  lines.
The closer together the lines, the stronger the field.

3. Electric  field  lines  start  on  positive  charges  and  end  on  negative  charges;
and the number starting or ending is proportional to the magnitude of the
charge.

Also note that field lines never cross. Why not? Because it would not make sense
for the electric field to have two directions at the same point.

Gravitational Field
The field concept can also be applied to the gravitational force (Chapter 5). Thus we
can say that a gravitational field exists for every object that has mass. One object
attracts  another  by  means  of  the  gravitational  field. The  Earth, for  example,
can be said to possess a gravitational field (Fig. 16–33) which is responsible for
the  gravitational  force  on  objects. The  gravitational  field is  defined  as  the
force per unit mass. The magnitude of the Earth’s gravitational field at any point
above the Earth’s surface is thus
is the mass of the Earth,
r is the distance of the point from the Earth’s center, and G is the gravitational
constant (Chapter 5). At the Earth’s surface, r is the radius of the Earth and the
gravitational field is equal to g, the acceleration due to gravity. Beyond the Earth,
the gravitational field can be calculated at any point as a sum of terms due to Earth,
Sun, Moon, and other bodies that contribute significantly.

GME(cid:2)r2,

where

ME

A,
†The  magnitude  of  the  constant  electric  field  between  two  parallel  plates  is  given  by
where Q is the magnitude of the charge on each plate and A is the area of one plate. We show this in
the optional Section 16–12 on Gauss’s law.

E = Q(cid:2)(cid:2)
0

458 CHAPTER 16 Electric Charge and Electric Field

16–9 Electric Fields and Conductors

We  now  discuss  some  properties  of  conductors. First, the  electric  field  inside  a
conductor is zero in the static situation—that is, when the charges are at rest. If
there were an electric field within a conductor, there would be a force on the free
electrons. The electrons would move until they reached positions where the electric
field, and therefore the electric force on them, did become zero.

+
−

(cid:2)

+ −

Conductor

+−

−

+

−

+

This reasoning has some interesting consequences. For one, any net charge on
a conductor distributes itself on the surface. For a negatively charged conductor,
you can imagine that the negative charges repel one another and race to the sur-
face to get as far from one another as possible. Another consequence is the following.
Suppose that a positive charge Q is surrounded by an isolated uncharged metal
conductor whose shape is a spherical shell, Fig. 16–34. Because there can be no
field within the metal, the lines leaving the central positive charge must end on
negative charges on the inner surface of the metal. That is, the encircled charge
±Q
on  the  inner  surface  of
the  spherical  shell. Since  the  shell  is  neutral, a  positive  charge  of  the  same
magnitude,
must exist on the outer surface of the shell. Thus, although no
field  exists  in  the  metal  itself, an  electric  field  exists  outside  of  it, as  shown  in
Fig. 16–34, as if the metal were not even there.

induces  an  equal  amount  of  negative  charge,

–Q,

±Q,

A related property of static electric fields and conductors is that the electric
field is always perpendicular to the surface outside of a conductor. If there were a
component of  parallel to the surface (Fig. 16–35), it would exert a force on free
electrons  at  the  surface, causing  the  electrons  to  move  along  the  surface  until
they reached positions where no net force was exerted on them parallel to the
surface—that is, until the electric field was perpendicular to the surface.

B
E

These  properties  apply  only  to  conductors. Inside  a  nonconductor, which
does not have free electrons, a static electric field can exist as we will see in the next
Chapter. Also, the electric field outside a nonconductor does not necessarily make
an angle of 90° to the surface.

FIGURE 16–36 Example 16–11.

+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+

−
−
−
−
−
−
−
−
−
−
−
−
−
−

(a)

+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+

−
−
−
−

+
+
+
+

−
−
−
−
−
−
−
−
−
−
−
−
−
−

(b)

CONCEPTUAL EXAMPLE 16;11
Shielding, and safety in a storm. A neu-
tral hollow metal box is placed between two parallel charged plates as shown in
Fig. 16–36a. What is the field like inside the box?

RESPONSE If our metal box had been solid, and not hollow, free electrons in
the  box  would  have  redistributed  themselves  along  the  surface  until  all  their
individual fields would have canceled each other inside the box. The net field
inside the box would have been zero. For a hollow box, the external field is not
changed since the electrons in the metal can move just as freely as before to the
surface. Hence the field inside the hollow metal box is also zero, and the field lines
are shown in Fig. 16–36b. A conducting box is an effective device for shielding
delicate instruments and electronic circuits from unwanted external electric fields.
We also can see that a relatively safe place to be during a lightning storm is inside
a parked car, surrounded by metal. See also Fig. 16–37, where a person inside a
porous “cage” is protected from a strong electric discharge. (It is not safe in a
lightning storm to be near a tree which can conduct, or out in the open where
you are taller than the surroundings.)

FIGURE 16–34 A charge inside a
neutral spherical metal shell induces
charge on its surfaces. The electric
field exists even beyond the shell,
but not within the conductor itself.

B
E

FIGURE 16–35 If the electric field
at the surface of a conductor had a
B
component parallel to the surface,
7 ,
E
the latter would accelerate electrons
into motion. In the static case, must
be zero, and the electric field must be
perpendicular to the conductor’s
B = E
surface: E
⊥ .
B
E

B
E

B
E

B

7

B
E

Good conductor

FIGURE 16–37 High-voltage “Van
de Graaff” generators create strong
electric fields in the vicinity of the
“Faraday cage” below. The strong field
accelerates stray electrons in the
atmosphere to the KE needed to
knock electrons out of air atoms,
causing an avalanche of charge which
flows to (or from) the metal cage. The
metal cage protects the person inside it.

P H Y S I C S   A P P L I E D

Electrical shielding

SECTION 16–9 459

*

16–10 Electric Forces in Molecular Biology:

DNA Structure and Replication

P H Y S I C S   A P P L I E D
Inside a cell:
kinetic theory plus
electrostatic force

FIGURE 16–38 Image of DNA
replicating, made by a transmission
electron microscope.

P H Y S I C S   A P P L I E D
DNA structure

The study of the structure and functioning of a living cell at the molecular level
is known as molecular biology. It is an important area for application of physics.
The interior of every biological cell is mainly water. We can imagine a cell as a thick
soup of molecules continually in motion (kinetic theory, Chapter 13), colliding with
one  another  with  various  amounts  of  kinetic  energy. These  molecules  interact
with one another because of the electrostatic force between molecules.

Indeed, cellular  processes  are  now  considered  to  be  the  result  of  random
(“thermal”) molecular motion plus the ordering effect of the electrostatic force. As
an example, we look at DNA structure and replication. The picture we present
is a model of what happens based on physical theories and experiment.

The genetic information that is passed on from generation to generation in all
living cells is contained in the chromosomes, which are made up of genes. Each
gene contains the information needed to produce a particular type of protein mol-
ecule, and that information is built into the principal molecule of a chromosome,
DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid), Fig. 16–38. DNA molecules are made up of many
small molecules known as nucleotide bases which are each polar (Section 16–2)
due to unequal sharing of electrons. There are four types of nucleotide bases in
DNA: adenine (A), cytosine (C), guanine (G), and thymine (T).

The DNA of a chromosome generally consists of two long DNA strands wrapped
about one another in the shape of a “double helix.” The genetic information is
contained in the specific order of the four bases (A, C, G, T) along each strand. As
shown in Fig. 16–39, the two strands are attracted by electrostatic forces—that is,
by the attraction of positive charges to negative charges that exist on parts of the
molecules. We see in Fig. 16–39a that an A (adenine) on one strand is always oppo-
site a  T on the other strand; similarly, a G is always opposite a C. This important
ordering effect occurs because the shapes of A, T, C, and G are such that a T fits
closely only into an A, and a G into a C. Only in the case of this close proximity of
the charged portions is the electrostatic force great enough to hold them together
even for a short time (Fig. 16–39b), forming what are referred to as “weak bonds.”

A
C
G
T
A
G

C
G
T
T
A

C
A

T
G

T
C
G
T
G
C

T

C
A

A
A

(a)

FIGURE 16–39 (a) Schematic diagram of a section of DNA
double helix. (b) “Close-up” view of the helix, showing how
A and T attract each other and how G and C attract each other
through electrostatic forces. The
certain atoms represent net charges, usually a fraction of e,
due to uneven sharing of electrons. The red dots indicate the
electrostatic attraction (often called a “weak bond” or
“hydrogen bond”—Section 29–3). Note that there are two
weak bonds between A and T, and three between C and G.

signs indicated on

and

±

–

460 CHAPTER 16 Electric Charge and Electric Field

Thymine (T)
H
H
C

H

H

N

0.280 nm
O
H
–
–+
0.300 nm
HN
–
+

N

–

C

+
C

N

C

Adenine (A)
N

H

C

C

C

C

N

C N

To
chain

CH

To chain

O

H
1.11 nm

Cytosine (C)
H

N
–

N
–

0.290 nm
H
+
0.300 nm
H
+ –

O
–

N

H

C

C

CH

chain
To

N

C

+

Guanine (G)

+

C

C

N

H

C

C

N

To
chain

O
–

0.290 nm

C

N

NH
+ –

H
1.08 nm

(b)

The electrostatic force between A and T, and between C and G, exists because
these molecules have charged parts. These charges are due to some electrons in
each  of  these  molecules  spending  more  time  orbiting  one  atom  than  another.
For  example, the  electron  normally  on  the  H  atom  of  adenine  (upper  part  of
Fig. 16–39b) spends some of its time orbiting the adjacent N atom (more on this
in Chapter 29), so the N has a net negative charge and the H is left with a net positive
charge. This
atom  of  thymine.
±
charges usually have magnitudes of a fraction of e (charge on
These net
the electron) such as 0.2e or 0.4e. (This is what we mean by “polar” molecules.)
is  involved, the  weak  bond  it  can  make  with  a  nearby  negative
O–,
is  so  small)  and  is

H ±
[When
charge, such  as
referred to as a hydrogen bond (Section 29–3).]

atom  of  adenine  is  then  attracted  to  the
–

is  relatively  strong  (partly  because

H ±
and

H ±

O–

When  the  DNA  replicates  (duplicates)  itself  just  before  cell  division, the
arrangement of A opposite T and G opposite C is crucial for ensuring that the
genetic  information  is  passed  on  accurately  to  the  next  generation, Fig. 16–40.
The two strands of DNA separate (with the help of enzymes, which also operate
via the electrostatic force), leaving the charged parts of the bases exposed.

P H Y S I C S   A P P L I E D

DNA replication

Old

C

T

A

T

A

A

G

T

New

A

T

T

A

A

T

New

C

T
A G

A

TT

Old

New

A

T

C

G

G

New

Old

A

A

T

C

G

GG

C

2

4

3

A

T

1

C

A

T

T

G

G

A

C

Old

A

T

T

A

G

C

C

G

T

A

A

T

G

C

A

T

T

A

G

C

Old

A

T

T

A

C

G

C

G

1

T

A

Old

2

FIGURE 16–40 Replication of DNA.

Once replication starts, let us see how the correct order of bases occurs by
looking at the G molecule indicated by the red arrow in Fig. 16–40. Many unat-
tached  nucleotide  bases  of  all  four  kinds  are  bouncing  around  in  the  cellular
fluid, and the only type that will experience attraction to our G, if it comes close
to it, will be a C. The charges on the other three bases can not get close enough to
those  on  the  G  to  provide  a  significant  attractive  force—remember  that  the
Because
electrostatic (Coulomb) force decreases rapidly with distance
the G does not attract an A, T, or G appreciably, an A, T, or G will be knocked
away  by  collisions  with  other  molecules  before  enzymes  can  attach  it  to  the
growing chain (number 3 in Fig. 16–40). But the electrostatic force will often hold
a C opposite our G long enough so that an enzyme can attach the C to the growing
end of the new chain. Thus electrostatic forces are responsible for selecting the
bases  in  the  proper  order  during  replication. Note in  Fig. 16–40  that  the  new
number 4 strand has the same order of bases as the old number 1 strand; and the
new number 3 strand is the same as the old number 2. So the two new double
helixes, 1–3  and  2–4, are  identical  to  the  original  1–2  helix. Hence  the  genetic
information is passed on accurately to the next generation.

Ar 1(cid:2)r2B.

This process of DNA replication is often presented as if it occurred in clock-
work fashion—as if each molecule knew its role and went to its assigned place. But
this is not the case. The forces of attraction are rather weak and become significant
only when charged parts of the two molecules have “complementary shapes,” meaning
they can get close enough so that the electrostatic force
is strong enough
to form weak bonds. If the molecular shapes are not just right, there is almost no
electrostatic attraction, which is why there are so few mistakes. Thus, out of the ran-
dom motion of the molecules, the electrostatic force acts to bring order out of chaos.

Ar 1(cid:2)r2B

*SECTION 16–10 461

The random (thermal) velocities of molecules in a cell affect cloning. When a
bacterial cell divides, the two new bacteria have nearly identical DNA. Even if
the DNA were perfectly identical, the two new bacteria would not end up behaving
in exactly the same way. Long protein, DNA, and RNA molecules get bumped into
different shapes, and even the expression† of genes can thus be different. Loosely
held parts of large molecules such as a methyl group
can also be knocked
off by a strong collision with another molecule. Hence, cloned organisms are not
identical, even  if  their  DNA  were  identical. Indeed, there  can  not  really  be
genetic determinism.

(CH3

)

*

16–11 Photocopy Machines and
Computer Printers Use Electrostatics
Photocopy machines and laser printers use electrostatic attraction to print an image.
They each use a different technique to project an image onto a special cylindrical
drum (or rotating conveyor belt). The drum is typically made of aluminum, a good
conductor; its surface is coated with a thin layer of selenium, which has the inter-
esting property (called “photoconductivity”) of being an electrical nonconductor
in the dark, but a conductor when exposed to light.

In a photocopier, lenses and mirrors focus an image of the original sheet of
paper onto the drum, much like a camera lens focuses an image on an electronic
detector  or  film. Step  1, done  in  the  dark, is  the  placing  of  a  uniform  positive
charge on the drum’s selenium layer by a charged roller or rod: see Fig. 16–41.

P H Y S I C S   A P P L I E D
Photocopy machines

(2) the lens focuses image

FIGURE 16–41 Inside a photocopy
machine: (1) the selenium drum is given
a + charge;
on drum—only dark spots stay charged;
(3) toner particles (negatively charged)
are attracted to positive areas on drum;
(4) the image is transferred to paper;
(5) heat binds the image to the paper.

(3) Toner hopper

(4) Paper

(2) Lens focuses image of original

(1) Charging rod or roller

(cid:6)(cid:6)(cid:6)(cid:6)(cid:6) (cid:6)

(cid:6)(cid:6)(cid:6)(cid:6)
(cid:6)(cid:6)(cid:6)(cid:6)(cid:6)
(cid:6)(cid:6)(cid:6)(cid:6)(cid:6)(cid:6)(cid:6)(cid:6)(cid:6)
(cid:6)
(cid:6)(cid:6)(cid:6)(cid:6)(cid:6)
(cid:6)(cid:6)(cid:6)(cid:6)(cid:6)(cid:6)(cid:6)(cid:6)(cid:6)(cid:6)(cid:6)(cid:6)(cid:6)(cid:6)(cid:6)(cid:6)(cid:6)(cid:6)
(cid:6)(cid:6)(cid:6)(cid:6)(cid:6)(cid:6)(cid:6)(cid:6)(cid:6)(cid:6)(cid:6)

(cid:6)(cid:6)(cid:6)

(cid:6)

Charging rod

(5) Heater rollers

In step 2, the image to be copied is projected onto the drum. For simplicity, let us
assume the image is a dark letter A on a white background (as on the page of a
book) as shown in Fig. 16–41. The letter A on the drum is dark, but all around it
is light. At all these light places, the selenium becomes conducting and electrons
flow in from the aluminum beneath, neutralizing those positive areas. In the dark
areas of the letter A, the selenium is nonconducting and so retains the positive
charge already put on it, Fig. 16–41. In step 3, a fine dark powder known as toner
is given a negative charge, and is brushed on the drum as it rotates. The negatively
charged toner particles are attracted to the positive areas on the drum (the A in
our case) and stick only there. In step 4, the rotating drum presses against a piece
of paper which has been positively charged more strongly than the selenium, so
the toner particles are transferred to the paper, forming the final image. Finally,
step 5, the paper is heated to fix the toner particles firmly on the paper.

In a color copier (or printer), this process is repeated for each color—black,
cyan (blue), magenta (red), and yellow. Combining these four colors in different
proportions produces any desired color.

†The separate genes of a DNA double helix can be covered by protein molecules, keeping those genes
from being “expressed”—that is, translated into the proteins they code for (see Section 29–3).

462 CHAPTER 16 Electric Charge and Electric Field

Toner hopper

Paper

Laser beam scans

Laser

Movable
mirror

FIGURE 16–42 Inside a laser
printer: a movable mirror sweeps
the laser beam in horizontal lines
across the drum.

Heater rollers

A laser printer uses a computer output to program  the  intensity of a laser
beam onto the selenium-coated drum of Fig. 16–42. The thin beam of light from
the laser is scanned (by a movable mirror) from side to side across the drum in a
series  of  horizontal  lines, each  line  just  below  the  previous  line. As  the  beam
sweeps  across  the  drum, the  intensity  of  the  beam  is  varied  by  the  computer
output, being strong for a point that is meant to be white or bright, and weak or zero
for points that are meant to come out dark. After each sweep, the drum rotates very
slightly for additional sweeps, Fig. 16–42, until a complete image is formed on it.
The  light  parts  of  the  selenium  become  conducting  and  lose  their  (previously
given) positive electric charge, and the toner sticks only to the dark, electrically
charged areas. The drum then transfers the image to paper, as in a photocopier.

An inkjet printer does not use a drum. Instead nozzles spray tiny droplets of
ink directly at the paper. The nozzles are swept across the paper, each sweep just
above the previous one as the paper moves down. On each sweep, the ink makes
dots on the paper, except for those points where no ink is desired, as directed by
the computer. The image consists of a huge number of very tiny dots. The quality
or resolution of a printer is usually specified in dots per inch (dpi) in each (linear)
direction.

*

16–12 Gauss’s Law

An important relation in electricity is Gauss’s law, developed by the great mathe-
matician Karl Friedrich Gauss (1777–1855). It relates electric charge and electric
field, and is a more general and elegant form of Coulomb’s law.

Gauss’s law involves the concept of electric flux, which refers to the electric
field passing through a given area. For a uniform electric field  passing through
an area A, as shown in Fig. 16–43a, the electric flux

is defined as

£E

B
E

£

E

= EA cos u,

u

where
pendicular to the area. The flux can be written equivalently as

is  the  angle  between  the  electric  field  direction  and  a  line  drawn  per-

£

E

= E⊥ A = EA⊥ = EA cos u,

(16;7)

E⊥ = E cos u
where
(Fig. 16–43b)  and, similarly,
perpendicular to the field

B
E

A⊥ = A cos u

(Fig. 16–43c).

is  the  component  of

B
E

perpendicular  to  the  area
is  the  projection  of  the  area  A

Electric  flux  can  be  interpretated  in  terms  of  field  lines. We  mentioned  in
Section 16–8 that field lines can always be drawn so that the number (N) passing
through unit area perpendicular to the field
is proportional to the magnitude
Hence,
of the field (E): that is,

E r N(cid:2)A⊥ .

AA⊥B

N r EA⊥ = £

E ,

(16;8)

so the flux through an area is proportional to the number of lines passing through
that area.

P H Y S I C S   A P P L I E D

Laser printer

P H Y S I C S   A P P L I E D

Inkjet printer

B
E

(a)

(b)

θ

Area A

Perpendicular to area

θ

E⊥

θ

B
E

B
E

B
A

B

E

(c)

A⊥

Area A

B
E

FIGURE 16–43 (a) A uniform
electric field  passing through a flat
E⊥ = E cos u
square area A. (b)
is
B
the component of  perpendicular
E
to the plane of area A.
A⊥ = A cos u
(c)
(dashed) of the area A
B
perpendicular to the field E
.

is the projection

*SECTION 16–12 Gauss’s Law 463

Δ
Δ

A1
A2

θ
1

θ
2

B
E
1

B
E

2

B
E

B
E

Closed
surface

FIGURE 16–44 Electric field lines
passing through a closed surface.
The surface is divided up into many
1 , ¢A
tiny areas,
and so on,
of which only two are shown.

¢A

2 ,

p

,

GAUSS’S LAW

FIGURE 16–45 Cross-sectional
drawing of a thin spherical shell
r
(gray) of radius
0 ,
charge Q uniformly distributed. The
green circles
and
1
two gaussian surfaces we use to
determine  Example 16–12.

carrying a net

represent

B
E
.

A

A

2

+

+

A1
+

+

+

r0

A2

r

B
E

+

+

r

+

+

+

+

A2

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

A1

+

+

+

Gauss’s law involves the total flux through a closed surface—a surface of any
shape that encloses a volume of space. For any such surface, such as that shown in
p
1 , ¢A
Fig. 16–44, we divide the surface up into many tiny areas,
,
is small enough that it can be
and so on. We make the division so that each
considered flat and so that the electric field can be considered constant through
each
Then the total flux through the entire surface is the sum over all the
individual fluxes through each of the tiny areas:

2 , ¢A

¢A.

¢A

¢A

3 ,

£

E

1

¢A

¢A

+ E
2

= E
1

1 cos u

2 cos u
= a E ¢A cos u = a E⊥ ¢A,
©

2

+ p

where the symbol  means “sum of.” We saw in Section 16–8 that the number
of field  lines  starting  on  a  positive  charge  or  ending  on  a  negative  charge  is
proportional to the magnitude of the charge. Hence, the net number of lines N
pointing out of any closed surface (number of lines pointing out minus the number
Qencl .
pointing in) must be proportional to the net charge enclosed by the surface,
But  from  Eq. 16–8, we  have  that  the  net  number  of  lines  N is  proportional  to
the total flux

Therefore,

£

E .

£

E

= a

E⊥ ¢A r Qencl .

closed
surface

The constant of proportionality, to be consistent with Coulomb’s law, is
we have

1(cid:2)(cid:2)

0 ,

so

(16;9)

E⊥ ¢A =

Qencl
(cid:2)
0

,

a
closed
surface
(©)

where the sum
within that surface. This is Gauss’s law.

is over any closed surface, and

Qencl

is the net charge enclosed

Coulomb’s law and Gauss’s law can be used to determine the electric field
due to a given (static) charge distribution. Gauss’s law is useful when the charge
distribution  is  simple  and  symmetrical. However, we  must  choose  the  closed
“gaussian” surface very carefully so we can determine  We normally choose a
surface that has just the symmetry needed so that E will be constant on all or on
parts of its surface.

B
.
E

r
0

EXAMPLE 16;12
Charged spherical conducting shell. A thin spherical
shell of radius  possesses a total net charge Q that is uniformly distributed on it,
Fig. 16–45. Determine the electric field at points (a) outside the shell, and
(b) inside the shell.
APPROACH Because the charge is distributed symmetrically, the electric field
must  be  symmetric. Thus  the  field  outside  the  shell  must  be  directed  radially
outward (inward if
)  and must depend only on r.
SOLUTION (a) We choose any imaginary gaussian surface as a sphere of radius r
Ar 7 r
1 .
0
Then, by symmetry, the electric field will have the same magnitude at all points
B
E
on this gaussian surface. Because
is perpendicular to this surface, Gauss’s law
Qencl = Q
in Eq. 16–9)
gives (with

concentric with the shell, shown in Fig. 16–45 as the dashed circle

Q 6 0

A

B

a E⊥ ¢A = E a ¢A = EA4pr2B =

Q
(cid:2)
0

,

where

4pr2

is the surface area of our sphere (gaussian surface) of radius r. Thus

E =

1
4p(cid:2)
0

Q

r2

.

Cr 7 r
0

D

We see that the field outside a uniformly charged spherical shell is the same as if
all the charge were concentrated at the center as a point charge.

464 CHAPTER 16 Electric Charge and Electric Field

(b) Inside the shell, the electric field must also be symmetric. So E must again
in Fig. 16–45)
have the same value at all points on a spherical gaussian surface (
concentric  with  the  shell. Thus, E can  be  factored  out  of  the  sum  and, with
Qencl = 0

because the charge inside surface

is zero, we have

A

A

2

2

a E⊥ ¢A = E a ¢A

= EA4pr2B =

Qencl
(cid:2)
0

= 0.

Hence

E = 0

Cr 6 r
0

D

inside a uniform spherical shell of charge (as claimed in Section 16–9).

The results of Example 16–12 also apply to a uniform solid spherical conductor
that  is  charged, since  all  the  charge  would  lie  in  a  thin  layer  at  the  surface
(Section 16–9). In particular
Q

E =

1
4p(cid:2)
0

r2

outside a spherical conductor. Thus, the electric field outside a spherically symmetric
distribution of charge is the same as for a point charge of the same magnitude at
the  center  of  the  sphere. This  result  applies  also  outside  a  uniformly  charged
(Fig. 16–45) and
nonconductor, because we can use the same gaussian surface
the same symmetry argument. We can also consider this a demonstration of our
1(cid:2)r2
statement in Chapter 5 about the gravitational force, which is also a perfect
force: The gravitational force exerted by a uniform sphere is the same as if all the
mass were at the center, as stated on page 120.

A

1

EXAMPLE 16;13
E near any conducting surface. Show that the magnitude
of the electric field just outside the surface of a good conductor of any shape is
given by

E =

s
(cid:2)
0

,

Q(cid:2)A,

on the conductor’s surface

is defined as the surface charge density,

s
where
at that point.
APPROACH We  choose  as  our  gaussian  surface  a  small  cylindrical  box, very
small  in  height  so  that  one  of  its  circular  ends  is  just  above  the  conductor
(Fig. 16–46). The other end is just below the conductor’s surface, and the very
short sides are perpendicular to it.
SOLUTION The electric field is zero inside a conductor and is perpendicular to
the surface just outside it (Section 16–9), so electric flux passes only through
the outside end of our cylindrical box; no flux passes through the very short sides
or through the inside end of our gaussian box. We choose the area A (of the flat
cylinder end above the conductor surface) small enough so that E is essentially
uniform over it. Then Gauss’s law gives

a E⊥ ¢A = EA =

Qencl
(cid:2)
0

=

sA
(cid:2)
0

,

and therefore

E =

s
(cid:2)
0

.

[at surface of conductor]

This useful result applies for any shape conductor, including a large, uniformly
charged flat sheet: the electric field will be constant and equal to s(cid:2)(cid:2)

0 .

FIGURE 16–46 Electric field near
the surface of a conductor. Two
small cylindrical boxes are shown
dashed. Either one can serve as our
gaussian surface. Example 16–13.

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

B
E

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

B
E

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

*SECTION 16–12 Gauss’s Law 465

+Q
+

−Q
−

B
E

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

−

−

−

−

−

−

−

−

−

−

−

This last Example also gives us the field between the two parallel plates we
discussed  in  Fig. 16–32d. If  the  plates  are  large  compared  to  their  separation,
then the field lines are perpendicular to the plates and, except near the edges,
they are parallel to each other. Therefore the electric field (see Fig. 16–47, which
shows a similar very thin gaussian surface as Fig. 16–46) is also

E =

s
(cid:2)
0

=

Q(cid:2)A
(cid:2)
0

=

Q
A
(cid:2)
0

,

c between two closely spaced,
oppositely charged, parallel plates

d

(16;10)

where

Q = sA

is the charge on one of the plates.

FIGURE 16–47 The electric field
between two closely spaced parallel
plates is uniform and equal to
E = s(cid:2)(cid:2)

0 .

Summary

There are two kinds of electric charge, positive and negative.
These designations are to be taken algebraically—that is, any
charge is plus or minus so many coulombs (C), in SI units.

Electric charge is conserved: if a certain amount of one type
of charge is produced in a process, an equal amount of the oppo-
site type is also produced; thus the net charge produced is zero.
According  to  atomic  theory, electricity  originates  in  the
atom, which consists of a positively charged nucleus surrounded
by  negatively  charged  electrons. Each  electron  has  a  charge
–e = –1.60 * 10–19 C.

Electric conductors are  those  materials  in  which  many
electrons are relatively free to move, whereas electric insulators
or nonconductors are  those  in  which  very  few  electrons  are
free to move.

An object is negatively charged when it has an excess of
electrons, and  positively  charged  when  it  has  less  than  its
normal number of electrons. The net charge on any object is a
whole number times

That is, charge is quantized.

–e.

or

±e

An  object  can  become  charged  by  rubbing  (in  which
electrons  are  transferred  from  one  material  to  another),
by  conduction (which  is  transfer  of  charge  from  one  charged
object to another by touching), or by induction (the separation
of  charge  within  an  object  because  of  the  close  approach  of
another charged object but without touching).

Electric charges exert a force on each other. If two charges
are of opposite types, one positive and one negative, they each
exert  an  attractive  force  on  the  other. If  the  two  charges  are
the same type, each repels the other.

The  magnitude  of  the  force  one  point  charge  exerts  on
another  is  proportional  to  the  product  of  their  charges, and
inversely  proportional  to  the  square  of  the  distance  between
them:

F = k

Q

Q
1
r2

2

=

1
4p(cid:2)
0

Q

Q

1
r2

2

;

(16;1, 16;2)

this is Coulomb’s law.

We think of an electric field as existing in space around any
charge or group of charges. The force on another charged object
is then said to be due to the electric field present at its location.
, at any point in space due to one or
more charges, is defined as the force per unit charge that would
act on a tiny positive test charge q placed at that point:

The electric field,

B
E

B

B = F
E
q

.

(16;3)

466 CHAPTER 16 Electric Charge and Electric Field

The  magnitude  of  the  electric  field  a  distance  r from  a  point
charge Q is

E = k

Q

r2

.

(16;4a)

The total electric field at a point in space is equal to the
vector  sum  of  the  individual  fields  due  to  each  contributing
charge. This is the principle of superposition.

Electric  fields  are  represented  by  electric  field  lines that
start  on  positive  charges  and  end  on  negative  charges. Their
direction indicates the direction the force would be on a tiny
positive test charge placed at each point. The lines can be drawn
so that the number per unit area is proportional to the magni-
tude of E.

The static electric field inside a conductor is zero, and the
electric field lines just outside a charged conductor are perpen-
dicular to its surface.

[*In the replication of DNA, the electrostatic force plays
a  crucial  role  in  selecting  the  proper  molecules  so  that  the
genetic information is passed on accurately from generation to
generation.]

[*Photocopiers and computer printers use electric charge

placed on toner particles and a drum to form an image.]

[*The  electric  flux passing  through  a  small  area  A for  a

uniform electric field

B
E

is

£

E

= E⊥ A,

(16;7)

E⊥

B
where
is the component of  perpendicular to the surface.
E
The  flux  through  a  surface  is  proportional  to  the  number  of
field lines passing through it.]

[*Gauss’s law states that the total flux summed over any
¢A
)
enclosed by the surface divided

closed surface (considered as made up of many small areas
Qencl
is equal to the net charge
by

(cid:2)

0 :

E⊥ ¢A =

a
closed
surface

Qencl
(cid:2)

0

.

(16;9)

Gauss’s law can be used to determine the electric field due to
given charge distributions, but its usefulness is mainly limited to
cases where the charge distribution displays much symmetry. The
real importance of Gauss’s law is that it is a general and elegant
statement of the relation between electric charge and electric field.]

Questions

1. If you charge a pocket comb by rubbing it with a silk scarf,
how can you determine if the comb is positively or nega-
tively charged?

2. Why  does  a  shirt  or  blouse  taken  from  a  clothes  dryer

sometimes cling to your body?

12. We are not normally aware of the gravitational or electric
force between two ordinary objects. What is the reason in
each case? Give an example where we are aware of each
one and why.

13. Explain why the test charges we use when measuring elec-

3. Explain why fog or rain droplets tend to form around ions

tric fields must be small.

or electrons in the air.

4. Why  does  a  plastic  ruler  that  has  been  rubbed  with  a
cloth  have  the  ability  to  pick  up  small  pieces  of  paper?
Why is this difficult to do on a humid day?

5. A positively charged rod is brought close to a neutral piece
of  paper, which  it  attracts. Draw  a  diagram  showing  the
separation of charge in the paper, and explain why attrac-
tion occurs.

6. Contrast  the  net  charge on  a  conductor  to  the  “free

charges” in the conductor.

7. Figures 16–7 and 16–8 show how a charged rod placed near
an uncharged metal object can attract (or repel) electrons.
There  are  a  great  many  electrons  in  the  metal, yet  only
some of them move as shown. Why not all of them?

8. When an electroscope is charged, its two leaves repel each
other and remain at an angle. What balances the electric
force of repulsion so that the leaves don’t separate further?
9. The balloon in Fig. 16–48 was rubbed on a student’s hair.
Explain  why  the  water  drip  curves  instead  of  falling
vertically.

14. When determining an electric field, must we use a positive
test charge, or would a negative one do as well? Explain.

15. Draw  the  electric  field  lines  surrounding  two  negative
l

electric charges a distance  apart.

16. Assume that the two opposite charges in Fig. 16–32a are
12.0 cm apart. Consider the magnitude of the electric field
2.5 cm  from  the  positive  charge. On  which  side  of  this
charge—top, bottom, left, or right—is the electric field the
strongest? The weakest? Explain.

17. Consider the electric field at the three points indicated by
the letters A, B, and C in Fig. 16–49. First draw an arrow
at each point indicating the direction of the net force that
a  positive  test  charge  would  experience  if  placed  at  that
point, then  list  the  letters  in  order  of  decreasing field
strength (strongest first). Explain.

B

(cid:2)

A

(cid:2)

C

FIGURE 16–49 Question 17.

18. Why can electric field lines never cross?

19. Show, using  the  three  rules  for  field  lines  given  in
Section  16–8, that  the  electric  field  lines  starting  or
ending  on  a  single  point  charge  must  be  symmetrically
spaced around the charge.

FIGURE 16–48 Question 9.

10. The  form  of  Coulomb’s  law  is  very  similar  to  that  for
Newton’s law of universal gravitation. What are the differ-
ences between these two laws? Compare also gravitational
mass and electric charge.

11. When  a  charged  ruler  attracts  small  pieces  of  paper,
sometimes a piece jumps quickly away after touching the
ruler. Explain.

20. Given two point charges, Q and 2Q, a distance  apart, is
there a point along the straight line that passes through them
where
when  their  signs  are  (a)  opposite, (b)  the
same? If yes, state roughly where this point will be.

E = 0

l

21. Consider a small positive test charge located on an electric
field line at some point, such as point P in Fig. 16–32a. Is
the  direction  of  the  velocity  and/or  acceleration  of  the
test charge along this line? Discuss.

*22. A  point  charge  is  surrounded  by  a  spherical  gaussian
surface of radius r. If the sphere is replaced by a cube of
side r, will

be larger, smaller, or the same? Explain.

£

E

Questions

467

1.

= –0.10 mC

is located at the origin.

MisConceptual Questions
Q
1
located on the positive x axis at
following is true of the force on
(a) It is attractive and directed in the
(b) It is attractive and directed in the
(c) It is repulsive and directed in the
(d) It is repulsive and directed in the

2
x = 1.0 m.
Q
Q
due to
±x
–x
±x
–x

= ±0.10 mC
is
Which of the
?
2
direction.
direction.
direction.
direction.

Q

1

2. Swap  the  positions  of

1

2

Q

2?

and

due to

Q
of  MisConceptual
1
Question 1. Which of the following is true of the force on
Q
Q
(a) It does not change.
(b) It changes from attractive to repulsive.
(c) It changes from repulsive to attractive.
(d) It changes from the
(e) It changes from the

direction to the
direction to the

direction.
direction.

–x
±x

±x
–x

3
4

m

3. Fred the lightning bug has a mass m and a charge

±q.
and a charge

Jane,
–2q.
his lightning-bug wife, has a mass of
Because  they  have  charges  of  opposite  sign, they  are
attracted  to  each  other. Which  is  attracted  more  to  the
other, and by how much?
(a) Fred, twice as much.
(b) Jane, twice as much.
(c) Fred, four times as much.
(d) Jane, four times as much.
(e) They are attracted to each other by the same

amount.

4. Figure 16–50 shows electric field lines due to a point charge.
What can you say about the field at point 1 compared with
the field at point 2?
(a) The field at point 2 is larger, because point 2 is on a

field line.

(b) The field at point 1 is larger, because point 1 is not on

a field line.

(c) The field at point 1 is zero, because point 1 is not on a

field line.

(d) The field at point 1 is larger, because the field lines are

closer together in that region.

1

2

+

FIGURE 16–50
MisConceptual Question 4.

6. As an object acquires a positive charge, its mass usually

(a) decreases.
(b) increases.
(c) stays the same.
(d) becomes negative.

7. Refer to Fig. 16–32d. If the two charged plates were moved
until they are half the distance shown without changing the
charge on the plates, the electric field near the center of the
plates would
(a) remain almost exactly the same.
(b) increase by a factor of 2.
(c) increase, but not by a factor of 2.
(d) decrease by a factor of 2.
(e) decrease, but not by a factor of 2.

8. We  wish  to  determine  the  electric  field  at  a  point  near  a
positively charged metal sphere (a good conductor). We do
to this point
so by bringing a small positive test charge,
and measure the force
will be ____________
B
as  it  was  at  that  point  before  the  test
the  electric  field
E
charge was present.
(a) greater than
(b) less than
(c) equal to

(cid:2)q
F
0
0

on it.

q
0 ,

F
0

9. We are usually not aware of the electric force acting between

two everyday objects because
(a) the electric force is one of the weakest forces in nature.
(b) the electric force is due to microscopic-sized particles

such as electrons and protons.

(c) the electric force is invisible.
(d) most everyday objects have as many plus charges as

minus charges.

10. To be safe during a lightning storm, it is best to be

(a) in the middle of a grassy meadow.
(b) inside a metal car.
(c) next to a tall tree in a forest.
(d) inside a wooden building.
(e) on a metal observation tower.

11. Which are the worst places in MisConceptual Question 10?

12. Which vector best represents the direction of the electric
field  at  the  fourth  corner  of  the  square  due  to  the  three
charges shown in Fig. 16–51?

−Q

+Q

5. A  negative  point  charge  is  in  an  electric  field  created  by
a positive point charge. Which of the following is true?
(a) The field points toward the positive charge, and the

force on the negative charge is in the same direction as
the field.

(b) The field points toward the positive charge, and the

force on the negative charge is in the opposite direction
to the field.

(c) The field points away from the positive charge, and the
force on the negative charge is in the same direction as
the field.

(d) The field points away from the positive charge, and the

force on the negative charge is in the opposite
direction to the field.

FIGURE 16–51
MisConceptual Question 12.

+Q

(b)

(a)

(c)

(d)

(e)

13. A small metal ball hangs from the ceiling by an insulating
thread. The ball is attracted to a positively charged rod held
near the ball. The charge of the ball must be
(a) positive.
(b) negative.
(c) neutral.
(d) positive or neutral.
(e) negative or neutral.

468 CHAPTER 16 Electric Charge and Electric Field

For assigned homework and other learning materials, go to the MasteringPhysics website.

Problems

16–5 and 16–6 Coulomb’s Law
C1 mC = 10–3 C,   1 mC = 10–6 C,   1 nC = 10–9 C. D

14. (II) A charge of 6.15 mC is placed at each corner of a square
0.100 m on a side. Determine the magnitude and direction
of the force on each charge.

(q = ±26e)
between  an  iron  nucleus
electron if the distance between them is

1. (I) What is the magnitude of the electric force of attraction
and  its  innermost
1.5 * 10–12 m?
–48.0 mC?

2. (I) How many electrons make up a charge of
3. (I) What  is  the  magnitude  of  the  force  a

±25 mC

charge

exerts on a

±2.5 mC

charge 16 cm away?

4.0 * 10–15 m

4. (I) What is the repulsive electrical force between two protons
apart from each other in an atomic nucleus?
5. (II) When an object such as a plastic comb is charged by
rubbing  it  with  a  cloth, the  net  charge  is  typically  a  few
microcoulombs. If that charge is
by what percentage
does the mass of a 9.0-g comb change during charging?

3.0 mC,

6. (II) Two charged dust particles exert a force of

4.2 * 10–2 N
on each other. What will be the force if they are moved so
they are only one-eighth as far apart?

7. (II) Two small charged spheres are 6.52 cm apart. They are
moved, and the force each exerts on the other is found to
have tripled. How far apart are they now?

8. (II) A person scuffing her feet on a wool rug on a dry day
accumulates  a  net  charge  of
How  many  excess
electrons  does  she  get, and  by  how  much  does  her  mass
increase?

–28 mC.

9. (II) What is the total charge of all the electrons in a 12-kg
bar of gold? What is the net charge of the bar? (Gold has
79 electrons per atom and an atomic mass of 197 u.)

10. (II) Compare the electric force holding the electron in orbit
Ar = 0.53 * 10–10 mB
around  the  proton  nucleus  of  the
hydrogen  atom, with  the  gravitational  force  between  the
same electron and proton. What is the ratio of these two
forces?

11. (II) Particles of charge

are placed
in a line (Fig. 16–52). The center one is 0.35 m from each of
the others. Calculate the net force on each charge due to
the other two.

and

±65,

±48,

–95 mC

(cid:6)65   C(cid:7)

(cid:6)48   C(cid:7)

(cid:5)95   C(cid:7)

0.35 m

0.35 m

FIGURE 16–52 Problem 11.

12. (II) Three positive particles of equal charge,

are
located  at  the  corners  of  an  equilateral  triangle  of  side
15.0 cm (Fig. 16–53). Calculate
the magnitude and direction of
the net force on each particle
due to the other two.

(cid:6)17.0 mC

±17.0 mC,

15.0 cm

15.0 cm

FIGURE 16–53
Problem 12.

(cid:6)17.0 mC

15.0 cm

(cid:6)17.0 mC

13. (II) A charge Q is transferred from an initially uncharged
plastic ball to an identical ball 24 cm away. The force of attrac-
tion is then 17 mN. How many electrons were transferred
from one ball to the other?

15. (II) At  each  corner  of  a  square  of  side
charges of magnitude Q, 2Q, 3Q, and
4Q (Fig. 16–54). Determine the mag-
nitude  and  direction  of  the  force  on
the charge 2Q.

Q

l

l

there  are  point

l

l

2Q

l

3Q

FIGURE 16–54
Problem 15.

4Q

16. (II) A  large  electroscope  is  made  with “leaves” that  are
78-cm-long wires with tiny 21-g spheres at the ends. When
charged, nearly all the charge resides on the spheres. If the
wires each make a 26° angle with
the  vertical  (Fig. 16–55), what
total  charge  Q must  have  been
applied  to  the  electroscope?
Ignore the mass of the wires.

26° 26°

78 cm

78 cm

FIGURE 16–55
Problem 16.

Q
2

Q
2

90.0 mC.

17. (III) Two small nonconducting spheres have a total charge
(a) When placed 28.0 cm apart, the force each
of
exerts on the other is 12.0 N and is repulsive. What is the
charge on each? (b) What if the force were attractive?
and

are  a  distance  apart.
These  two  charges  are  free  to  move  but  do  not  because
there  is  a  third  (fixed)  charge  nearby. What  must  be  the
magnitude of the third charge and its placement in order
for the first two to be in equilibrium?

18. (III) Two  charges,

–3Q,

–Q

l

16–7 and 16–8 Electric Field, Field Lines

19. (I) Determine the magnitude and direction of the electric
force on an electron in a uniform electric field of strength
2460 N(cid:2)C

that points due east.

20. (I) A proton is released in a uniform electric field, and it
experiences an electric force of
toward the
south. Find  the  magnitude  and  direction  of  the  electric
field.

1.86 * 10–14 N

field 21.7 cm directly above an isolated

21. (I) Determine the magnitude and direction of the electric
charge.
22. (I)  A  downward  electric  force  of  6.4 N  is  exerted  on  a
charge. Find  the  magnitude  and  direction  of

–7.3 mC
the electric field at the position of this charge.

33.0 * 10–6 C

23. (II) Determine the magnitude of the acceleration experi-
enced by an electron in an electric field of
How
does  the  direction  of  the  acceleration  depend  on  the
direction of the field at that point?

756 N(cid:2)C.

24. (II) Determine the magnitude and direction of the electric
±5.8 mC
field at a point midway between a
charge 6.0 cm apart. Assume no other charges are nearby.
25. (II) Draw, approximately, the electric field lines about two
–3Q,

which are a distance  apart.

point charges,

–8.0 mC

and a

and

±Q

l

Problems

469

26. (II) What is the electric field strength at a point in space
where a proton experiences an acceleration of 2.4 million
“g’s”?

27. (II) An electron is released from rest in a uniform electric
105 m(cid:2)s2.

field  and  accelerates  to  the  north  at  a  rate  of
Find the magnitude and direction of the electric field.
28. (II) The electric field midway between two equal but oppo-
386 N(cid:2)C,
and  the  distance  between
site  point  charges  is
the charges is 16.0 cm. What is the magnitude of the charge
on each?

29. (II)  Calculate  the  electric  field  at  one  corner  of  a  square
1.22 m on a side if the other three corners are occupied by
3.25 * 10–6 C

charges.

30. (II)  Calculate  the  electric  field  at  the  center  of  a  square
–38.6 mC
–27.0 mC

42.5 cm on a side if one corner is occupied by a
charge  and  the  other  three  are  occupied  by
charges.

31. (II) Determine the direction and magnitude of the electric
field at the point P in Fig. 16–56. The charges are separated
by  a  distance  2a, and  point  P  is  a  distance  x from  the
midpoint between the two charges. Express your answer in
terms of Q, x, a, and k.

(cid:6)Q

a

(cid:5)Q

a

P

x

FIGURE 16–56 Problem 31.

32. (II) Two point charges,

= ±45 mC,
are separated by a distance of 12 cm. The electric field at the
point P (see Fig. 16–57) is zero. How far from

= –32 mC

is P?

and

Q

Q

1

2

Q
1

x

Q1
(cid:5)32 mC

P

12 cm

Q2
(cid:6)45 mC

FIGURE 16–57 Problem 32.

33. (II)  Determine  the  electric  field
Fig. 16–58 due to the two charges
at A and B.

B
E

A

at  the  origin  0  in
y
(cid:6)26 mC

FIGURE 16–58
Problem 33.

8.0 cm

0

8.0 cm

(cid:5)26 mC
B

8.0 cm

x

34. (II) You are given two unknown point charges,

2 .
At a point on the line joining them, one-third of the way
the electric field is zero (Fig. 16–59). What
Q
Q
from
1
is the ratio Q
2?

2 ,
(cid:2)Q
1

and

to

Q
1

Q

FIGURE 16–59
Problem 34.

E = 0

l
3Q1

Q2

l

35. (III) Use Coulomb’s law to determine the magnitude and
direction of the electric field at points A and B in Fig. 16–60
due to the two positive charges
shown. Are
your results consistent with Fig. 16–32b?

(Q = 4.7 mC)

B

A

5.0 cm

+ Q

+ Q

FIGURE 16–60
Problem 35.

5.0 cm

5.0 cm 10.0 cm

470 CHAPTER 16 Electric Charge and Electric Field

36. (III) An  electron  (mass

m = 9.11 * 10–31 kg

)  is  acceler-

B
ated  in  the  uniform  field
E
AE = 1.45 * 104 N(cid:2)CB
between
two thin parallel charged plates.
The  separation  of  the  plates  is
1.60 cm. The electron is accelerated
from rest near the negative plate
and  passes  through  a  tiny  hole
in  the  positive plate, Fig. 16–61.
(a) With what speed does it leave
the  hole? (b)  Show  that  the
gravitational force can be ignored.

−

−

−

−

−

−

−

−

−

−

−

−

−

−

−

−

e−

B
E

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

vB

FIGURE 16–61
Problem 36.

*16–10 DNA

*37. (III) The two strands of the helix-shaped DNA molecule are
held together by electrostatic forces as shown in Fig. 16–39.
Assume that the net average charge (due to electron sharing)
indicated  on  H  and  N  atoms  has  magnitude  0.2e and  on
the indicated C and O atoms is 0.4e. Assume also that atoms
on each molecule are separated by
Estimate
the net force between (a) a thymine and an adenine; and
(b)  a  cytosine  and  a  guanine. For  each  bond  (red  dots)
consider only the three atoms in a line (two atoms on one mol-
ecule, one atom on the other). (c) Estimate the total force for
a  DNA  molecule  containing
pairs  of  such  molecules.
Assume half are A–T pairs and half are C–G pairs.

1.0 * 10–10 m.

105

*16–12 Gauss’s Law

is

1.85 * 103 N(cid:3)m2(cid:2)C.
*39. (II)  In  Fig. 16–62, two  objects,

*38. (I) The total electric flux from a cubical box of side 28.0 cm
What charge is enclosed by the box?
have  charges
±1.0 mC
O3 ,
is electrically neutral. (a) What is the electric flux through
that encloses all three objects? (b) What is
the surface
the electric flux through the surface
that encloses the
third object only?

and
, respectively, and a third object,

–2.0 mC

and

O2 ,

O1

A

A

2

1

A1

O1

+1.0 mC

O2

−2.0 mC

O3
A2

FIGURE 16–62
Problem 39.

*40. (II) A  cube  of  side  8.50 cm  is  placed  in  a  uniform  field
E = 7.50 * 103 N(cid:2)C
with edges parallel to the field lines.
(a) What is the net flux through the cube? (b) What is the
flux through each of its six faces?

130 N(cid:2)C.

*41. (II) The  electric  field  between  two  parallel  square  metal
plates is
The plates are 0.85 m on a side and are
separated  by  3.0 cm. What  is  the  charge  on  each  plate
(assume equal and opposite)? Neglect edge effects.
*42. (II)  The  field  just  outside  a  3.50-cm-radius  metal  ball  is
and  points  toward  the  ball. What  charge

3.75 * 102 N(cid:2)C
resides on the ball?

*43. (III) A point charge Q rests at the center of an uncharged
thin spherical conducting shell. (See Fig. 16–34.)  What is
the  electric  field  E as  a  function  of  r (a)  for  r less  than
the  inner  radius  of  the  shell, (b)  inside  the  shell, and
(c) beyond the shell? (d) How does the shell affect the field
due to Q alone? How does the charge Q affect the shell?

General Problems

44. How close must two electrons be if the magnitude of the
electric force between them is equal to the weight of either
at the Earth’s surface?

45. Given that the human body is mostly made of water, esti-
mate the total amount of positive charge in a 75-kg person.
32 mC.

46. A 3.0-g copper penny has a net positive charge of

What fraction of its electrons has it lost?

47. Measurements  indicate  that  there  is  an  electric  field  sur-
rounding the Earth. Its magnitude is about
at the
Earth’s surface and points inward toward the Earth’s center.
What is the magnitude of the electric charge on the Earth?
Is it positive or negative? [Hint: The electric field outside
a uniformly charged sphere is the same as if all the charge
were concentrated at its center.]

150 N(cid:2)C

150 N(cid:2)C.

48. (a) The  electric  field  near  the  Earth’s  surface  has  magni-
tude of about
What is the acceleration experienced
by an electron near the surface of the Earth? (b) What about
a  proton? (c)  Calculate  the  ratio  of  each  acceleration  to
g = 9.8 m(cid:2)s2.

49. A water droplet of radius 0.018 mm remains stationary in
the air. If the downward-directed electric field of the Earth
is
how  many  excess  electron  charges  must  the
water droplet have?

150 N(cid:2)C,

50. Estimate the net force between the CO group and the HN
group  shown  in  Fig. 16–63. The  C  and  O  have  charges
&0.40e,
where
e = 1.6 * 10–19 C.
[Hint: Do  not  include  the  “internal”
forces between C and O, or between H and N.]

and  the  H  and  N  have  charges

&0.20e,

+
C

−

O

+

H

−

N

0.12 nm

0.10 nm

0.28 nm

FIGURE 16–63 Problem 50.

51. In  a  simple  model  of  the  hydrogen  atom, the  electron
revolves in a circular orbit around the proton with a speed
Determine  the  radius  of  the  electron’s
of
orbit. [Hint: See Chapter 5 on circular motion.]

2.2 * 106 m(cid:2)s.

52. Two  small  charged  spheres  hang  from  cords  of  equal

l

as  shown  in  Fig. 16–64  and
u
u
and  with  the
1
2
= Q,
= 2Q,
Q
and
1
determine  the  ratio

length
make  small  angles
vertical. (a) If
= m,
= m
m
u
2 .
1
between the spheres.

2
(b)  Estimate  the  distance

Q
2

1
(cid:2)u

l

l

u

2

u
1

FIGURE 16–64
Problem 52.

Q1

Q2

53. A  positive  point  charge

= 2.5 * 10–5 C

Q
is  fixed  at
1
the  origin  of  coordinates, and  a  negative  point  charge
x = ±2.4 m.
Q
2
Find the location of the place(s) along the x axis where the
electric field due to these two charges is zero.

= –5.0 * 10–6 C

is fixed to the x axis at

54. Dry air will break down and generate a spark if the electric
3 * 106 N(cid:2)C.
field exceeds about
How much charge could
be packed onto a green pea (diameter 0.75 cm) before the
pea spontaneously discharges? [Hint: Eqs. 16–4 work out-
side a sphere if r is measured from its center.]

55. Two  point  charges,

2

Q

Q
1

and

= 1.8 mC,

= –6.7 mC
are
located between two oppositely charged parallel plates, as
shown in Fig. 16–65. The two charges are separated by a
distance  of
Assume  that  the  electric  field
produced  by  the  charged  plates  is
E = 53,000 N(cid:2)C.
uniform  and  equal  to
Calculate  the  net  electrostatic  force  on
Q
1

and give its direction.

x = 0.47 m.

Q1 Q2

−

−

+

+

+

−

+

−

FIGURE 16–65
Problem 55.

−

−

−

+

+

+

x

56. Packing material made of pieces of foamed polystyrene can
easily become charged and stick to each other. Given that
the  density  of  this  material  is  about
estimate
how much charge might be on a 2.0-cm-diameter foamed
polystyrene sphere, assuming the electric force between two
spheres stuck together is equal to the weight of one sphere.

35 kg(cid:2)m3,

57. A point charge

(m = 1.0 gram)

at the end of an insulating
cord of length 55 cm is observed to be in equilibrium in a
when  the
uniform  horizontal  electric  field  of
pendulum’s  position  is  as  shown  in  Fig. 16–66, with  the
charge  12 cm  above  the  lowest
(vertical)  position. If  the  field
points to the right in Fig. 16–66,
determine  the  magnitude  and
sign of the point charge.

9500 N(cid:2)C,

l = 55 cm

u

B
E

Q
m
12 cm

FIGURE 16–66
Problem 57.

58. Two  small, identical  conducting  spheres  A  and  B  are  a
distance R apart; each carries the same charge Q. (a) What
is the force sphere B exerts on sphere A? (b) An identical
sphere  with  zero  charge, sphere  C, makes  contact  with
sphere B and is then moved very far away. What is the net
force now acting on sphere A? (c) Sphere C is brought back
and now makes contact with sphere A and is then moved
far away. What is the force on sphere A in this third case?

59. For an experiment, a colleague of yours says he smeared
toner particles uniformly over the surface of a sphere 1.0 m
in  diameter  and  then  measured  an  electric  field  of
5000 N(cid:2)C
near its  surface. (a)  How  many  toner  particles
(Example 16–6) would  have  to  be  on  the  surface  to  pro-
duce these results? (b) What is the total mass of the toner
particles?

60. A proton

Am = 1.67 * 10–27 kgB

uniform  electric  field
B
Earth’s surface, and determine E
.

is suspended at rest in a
Take  into  account  gravity  at  the

B
.
E

General Problems

471

61. A point charge of mass 0.185 kg, and net charge

±0.340 mC,
hangs at rest at the end of an insulating cord above a large
sheet of charge. The horizontal sheet of fixed uniform charge
creates a uniform vertical electric field in the vicinity of
the point charge. The tension in the cord is measured to be
5.18 N. Calculate the magnitude and direction of the electric
field due to the sheet of charge (Fig. 16–67).

gB

Q = 0.340    C
(cid:7)
m = 0.185 kg

Uniform sheet of charge
FIGURE 16–67 Problem 61.

v
0

= 5.32 * 106 m(cid:2)s

62. An electron with speed

is traveling par-
E = 9.45 * 103 N(cid:2)C.
allel to an electric field of magnitude
(a) How far will the electron travel before it stops? (b) How
much time will elapse before it returns to its starting point?
63. Given the two charges shown in Fig. 16–68, at what posi-

tion(s) x is the electric field zero?

FIGURE 16–68
Problem 63.

+Q

−Q/2

P

d

x

Search and Learn
1. Referring to Section 16–4 and Figs. 16–11 and 16–12, what
happens to the separation of the leaves of an electroscope
when the charging object is removed from an electroscope
(a) charged by induction and (b) charged by conduction?
(c) Is it possible to tell whether the electroscope in Fig. 16–12a
has been charged by induction or by conduction? If so, which
way was it charged? (d) Draw electric field lines (Section 16–8)
for the electroscopes in Figs. 16–11a and 16–11b, omitting
the fields around the charging rod. How do the fields differ?
6.4 mC,
are at the corners of a square of side 9.2 cm. What charge
should  be  placed  at  the  center  of  the  square  so  that  all
charges are at equilibrium? Is this a stable or an unstable
equilibrium (Section 9–4) in the plane?

2. Four equal positive point charges, each of charge

3. Suppose  electrons  enter  a  uniform  electric  field  midway
between  two  plates  at  an  angle
to  the  horizontal, as
shown in Fig. 16–70. The path is symmetrical, so they leave
u
at  the  same  angle
and  just  barely  miss  the  top  plate.
0
u
Ignore
What  is
0?
fringing of the field.

7.2 cm
(cid:2)(cid:2)(cid:2)(cid:2)(cid:2)(cid:2)(cid:2)

u

0

FIGURE 16–70
Search and Learn 3.

u

0

E = 3.8 × 103 N/C
(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)

1.0 cm
u
0

64. What is the total charge of all the electrons in a 25-kg bar
of aluminum? (Aluminum has 13 electrons per atom and an
atomic mass of 27 u.)

±Q

–Q

65. Two point charges,

and

of mass m, are placed on
the ends of a massless rod of length  which is fixed to a
table by a pin through its center. If the apparatus is then
subjected to a uniform electric field E parallel to the table
and  perpendicular  to  the  rod, find  the  net  torque  on  the
system of rod plus charges.

l,

66. Determine the direction and magnitude of the electric field at
point P, Fig. 16–69. The two charges are separated by a dis-
tance of 2a. Point P is on the perpendicular bisector of the line
joining the charges, a distance x from the midpoint between
them. Express  your
answers  in  terms  of
Q, x, a, and k.

+Q

x

P

FIGURE 16–69
Problem 66.

–Q

a
a

7.22 * 1024

67. A  mole  of  carbon  contains

electrons. Two
electrically neutral carbon spheres, each containing 1 mole
of  carbon, are  separated  by  15.0 cm  (center  to  center).
What  fraction  of  electrons  would  have  to  be  transferred
from one sphere to the other for the electric force and the
gravitational force between the spheres to be equal?

AQ
1

4. What experimental observations mentioned in the text rule
out  the  possibility  that  the  numerator  in  Coulomb’s  law
contains the sum
2?
5. Near the surface of the Earth, there is a downward electric
and  a  downward  gravitational  field  of
A  charged  1.0-kg  mass  is  observed  to  fall  with
What are the magnitude and sign of

rather than the product

8.0 m(cid:2)s2.

150 N(cid:2)C

+ Q
2

Q
1

Q

B

field  of
9.8 N(cid:2)kg.
acceleration
its charge?

(Q = –e)

6. Identical negative charges

are located at two of
the three vertices of an equilateral triangle. The length of a
side of the triangle is  What is the magnitude of the net
electric  field  at  the  third  vertex? If  a  third  identical
negative charge was located at the third vertex, then what
would be the net electrostatic force on it due to the other
two charges? Use symmetry and explain how you used it.

l.

7. Suppose that electrical attraction, rather than gravity, were
responsible for holding the Moon in orbit around the Earth.
If equal and opposite charges Q were placed on the Earth
and the Moon, what should be the value of Q to maintain
the present orbit? Use data given on the inside front cover
of this book. Treat the Earth and Moon as point particles.

A N S W E R S   T O   E X E R C I S E S

A: (d).
B: Opposite.
C: 0.3 N, to the right.
D: 0.32 m.

E: (a) No; (b) yes, midway between them.
9.0 * 104 N(cid:2)C,
F:
±
G: (d), if the two
symmetry).

vertically upward.
charges are not at opposite corners (use

472 CHAPTER 16 Electric Charge and Electric Field
