The glow of the thin wire filament of
incandescent lightbulbs is caused by
the electric current passing through it.
Electric energy is transformed to
thermal energy (via collisions
between moving electrons and atoms
of the wire), which causes the wire’s
temperature to become so high that
it glows. In halogen lamps
(tungsten–halogen), shown on the
right, the tungsten filament is
surrounded by a halogen gas such as
bromine or iodine in a clear tube.
Halogens, via chemical reactions,
restore many of the tungsten atoms
that were evaporated from the
hot filament, allowing longer life,
higher temperature (typically 2900 K
versus 2700 K), better efficiency, and
whiter light.

Electric current and electric power

in electric circuits are of basic
importance in everyday life. We
examine both dc and ac in this
Chapter, and include the microscopic
analysis of electric current.

A P T

E

H

C

R

18

CONTENTS

18–1 The Electric Battery
18–2 Electric Current
18–3 Ohm’s Law: Resistance

and Resistors

18–4 Resistivity
18–5 Electric Power
18–6 Power in Household Circuits
18–7 Alternating Current
*18–8 Microscopic View of

Electric Current

*18–9 Superconductivity
*18–10 Electrical Conduction in the

Human Nervous System

501

Electric Currents

CHAPTER-OPENING QUESTION—Guess now!
The conductors shown are all made of copper and are at the same temperature.
Which conductor would have the greatest resistance to the flow of charge entering
from the left? Which would offer the least resistance?

Current

Current

(a)

Current

Current

(c)

(b)

(d)

I n the previous two Chapters we have been studying static electricity: electric

charges at rest. In this Chapter we begin our study of charges in motion, and
we call a flow of charge an electric current.
In  everyday  life  we  are  familiar  with  electric  currents  in  wires  and  other
conductors. Most practical electrical devices depend on electric current: current
through a lightbulb, current in the heating element of a stove, hair dryer, or elec-
tric heater, as well as currents in electronic devices. Electric currents can exist in
conductors  such  as  wires, but  also  in  semiconductor  devices, human  cells  and
their membranes (Section 18–10), and in empty space.

In electrostatic situations, we saw in Section 16–9 that the electric field must
be  zero  inside  a  conductor  (if  it  weren’t, the  charges  would  move). But  when
charges are moving along a conductor, an electric field is needed to set charges
into  motion, and  to  keep  them  in  motion  against  even  low  resistance  in  any
normal  conductor. We  can  control  the  flow  of  charge  using  electric  fields  and
electric  potential  (voltage), concepts  we  have  just  been  discussing. In  order  to
have a current in a wire, a potential difference is needed, which can be provided
by a battery.

We first look at electric current from a macroscopic point of view. Later in
the Chapter we look at currents from a microscopic (theoretical) point of view as
a flow of electrons in a wire.

18–1 The Electric Battery

Until the year 1800, the technical development of electricity consisted mainly of
producing  a  static  charge  by  friction. It  all  changed  in  1800  when Alessandro
Volta (1745–1827; Fig. 18–1) invented the electric battery, and with it produced
the first steady flow of electric charge—that is, a steady electric current.

The events that led to the discovery of the battery are interesting. Not only
was  this  an  important  discovery, but  it  also  gave  rise  to  a  famous  scientific
debate.

In the 1780s, Luigi Galvani (1737–1798), professor at the University of Bologna,
carried out a series of experiments on the contraction of a frog’s leg muscle by using
static electricity. Galvani found that the muscle also contracted when dissimilar
metals were inserted into the frog. Galvani believed that the source of the electric
charge was in the frog muscle or nerve itself, and that the metal merely transmitted
the charge to the proper points. When he published his work in 1791, he termed
this charge “animal electricity.” Many wondered, including Galvani himself, if he
had discovered the long-sought “life-force.”

Volta, at  the  University  of  Pavia  200 km  away, was  skeptical  of  Galvani’s
results, and came to believe that the source of the electricity was not in the animal
itself, but rather in the contact between the dissimilar metals. Volta realized that
a moist conductor, such as a frog muscle or moisture at the contact point of two
dissimilar metals, was necessary in the circuit if it was to be effective. He also saw
that the contracting frog muscle was a sensitive instrument for detecting electric
“tension” or “electromotive force” (his words for what we now call voltage), in
fact more sensitive than the best available electroscopes that he and others had
developed.†

Volta’s research found that certain combinations of metals produced a greater
effect than others, and, using his measurements, he listed them in order of effec-
tiveness. (This “electrochemical series” is still used by chemists today.) He also
found that carbon could be used in place of one of the metals.

Volta then conceived his greatest contribution to science. Between a disc of
zinc and one of silver, he placed a piece of cloth or paper soaked in salt solution
or dilute acid and piled a “battery” of such couplings, one on top of another, as
shown in Fig. 18–2. This “pile” or “battery” produced a much increased potential
difference. Indeed, when strips of metal connected to the  two ends of  the pile
were brought close, a spark was produced. Volta had designed and built the first
electric battery. He published his discovery in 1800.

†Volta’s most sensitive electroscope (Section 16–4) measured about 40 V per degree (angle of leaf
separation). Nonetheless, he  was  able  to  estimate  the  potential  differences  produced  by  combina-
tions of dissimilar metals in contact. For a silver–zinc contact he got about 0.7 V, remarkably close to
today’s value of 0.78 V.

FIGURE 18–1 Alessandro Volta.
In this portrait, Volta demonstrates
his battery to Napoleon in 1801.

FIGURE 18–2 A voltaic battery,
from Volta’s original publication.

502 CHAPTER 18 Electric Currents

+
Terminal

–
Terminal

Carbon
electrode
(+)

+

–

Zinc
electrode
(–)

Sulfuric acid

FIGURE 18–3 Simple electric cell.

Electric Cells and Batteries
A  battery  produces  electricity  by  transforming  chemical  energy  into  electrical
energy. Today  a  great  variety  of  electric  cells  and  batteries  are  available, from
flashlight batteries to the storage battery of a car. The simplest batteries contain
two plates or rods made of dissimilar metals (one can be carbon) called electrodes.
The electrodes are immersed in a solution or paste, such as a dilute acid, called
the electrolyte. Such a device is properly called an electric cell, and several cells
connected  together  is  a  battery, although  today  even  a  single  cell  is  called  a
battery. The chemical reactions involved in most electric cells are quite complicated.
Here we describe how one very simple cell works, emphasizing the physical aspects.
The cell shown in Fig. 18–3 uses dilute sulfuric acid as the electrolyte. One of
the electrodes is made of carbon, the other of zinc. The part of each electrode
outside the solution is called the terminal, and connections to wires and circuits
are made here. The acid tends to dissolve the zinc electrode. Each zinc atom leaves
two electrons behind on the electrode and enters the solution as a positive ion. The
zinc electrode thus acquires a negative charge. The electrolyte becomes positively
charged, and can pull electrons off the carbon electrode. Thus the carbon electrode
becomes positively charged. Because there is an opposite charge on the two elec-
trodes, there is a potential difference between the two terminals.

In a cell whose terminals are not connected, only a small amount of the zinc
is  dissolved, for  as  the  zinc  electrode  becomes  increasingly  negative, any  new
positive zinc ions produced are attracted back to the electrode. Thus, a particular
potential difference (or voltage) is maintained between the two terminals. If charge
is  allowed  to  flow  between  the  terminals, say, through  a  wire  (or  a  lightbulb),
then more zinc can be dissolved. After a time, one or the other electrode is used up
and the cell becomes “dead.”

The voltage that exists between the terminals of a battery depends on what the
electrodes are made of and their relative ability to be dissolved or give up electrons.
When two or more cells are connected so that the positive terminal of one is
connected  to  the  negative  terminal  of  the  next, they  are  said  to  be  connected
in series and  their  voltages  add  up. Thus, the  voltage  between  the  ends  of  two
1.5-V AA flashlight batteries connected in series is 3.0 V, whereas the six 2-V cells
of an automobile storage battery give 12 V. Figure 18–4a shows a diagram of a
common “dry cell” or “flashlight battery” used not only in flashlights but in many
portable electronic devices, and Fig. 18–4b shows two smaller ones connected in
series  to  a  flashlight  bulb. An  incandescent  lightbulb  consists  of  a  thin, coiled
wire (filament) inside an evacuated glass bulb, as shown in Fig. 18–5 and in the
Chapter-Opening Photos, page 501. When charge passes through the filament, it gets
) and glows. Other bulb types, such as fluorescent, work differently.
very hot (

L 2800 K

FIGURE 18–4 (a) Diagram of an ordinary dry cell (like a D-cell
or AA). The cylindrical zinc cup is covered on the sides; its flat
bottom is the negative terminal. (b) Two dry cells (AA type)
connected in series. Note that the positive terminal of one cell
pushes against the negative terminal of the other.
+ Terminal
(top of carbon
electrode)

Insulation

Electrolyte
paste
(inside)

− Terminal

Negative electrode
(zinc cup)

(a) One D-cell

(b) Two AA batteries

FIGURE 18–5 An ordinary incandescent
lightbulb: the fine wire of the filament becomes
so hot that it glows. Incandescent halogen
bulbs enclose the filament in a small quartz
tube filled with a halogen gas (bromine or
iodine) which allows longer filament life and
higher filament temperature for greater
efficiency and whiteness.

Filament

Connecting
wires

External
connections

Insulator

SECTION 18–1 The Electric Battery 503

P H Y S I C S   A P P L I E D
Electric cars

(a)

Electric
current

Device
(bulb)

Electric
current

(b) A

+ –

B

FIGURE 18–6 (a) A simple electric
circuit. (b) Schematic drawing of the
same circuit, consisting of a battery,
connecting wires (thick gray lines),
and a lightbulb or other device.

Electric Cars
Considerable research is being done to improve batteries for electric cars and for
hybrids  (which  use  both  a  gasoline  internal  combustion  engine  and  an  electric
motor). One type of battery is lithium-ion, in which the anode contains lithium
and the cathode is carbon. Electric cars need no gear changes and can develop
full torque starting from rest, and so can accelerate quickly and smoothly. The
distance an electric car can go between charges of the battery (its “range”) is an
important parameter because each recharging of an electric car battery may take
hours, not minutes like a gas fill-up. Because charging an electric car can draw
a  large  current  over  a  period  of  several  hours, electric  power  companies
may need to upgrade their power grids so they won’t fail when many electric cars
are being charged at the same time in a small urban area.

18–2 Electric Current

The  purpose  of  a  battery  is  to  produce  a  potential  difference, which  can  then
make charges move. When a continuous conducting path is connected between
the terminals of a battery, we have an electric circuit, Fig. 18–6a. On any diagram
of a circuit, as in Fig. 18–6b, we use the symbol

(cid:2) (cid:3)

or

[battery symbol]

to represent a battery. The device connected to the battery could be a lightbulb,
a heater, a radio, or some other device. When such a circuit is formed, charge can
move (or flow) through the wires of the circuit, from one terminal of the battery
to  the  other, as  long  as  the  conducting  path  is  continuous. Any  flow  of  charge
such as this is called an electric current.

More precisely, the electric current in a wire is defined as the net amount of
charge that passes through the wire’s full cross section at any point per unit time.
Thus, the current I is defined as

I =

¢Q
¢t

,

(18;1)

¢Q

where
tion during the time interval

¢t.

is the amount of charge that passes through the conductor at any loca-

Electric current is measured in coulombs per second; this is given a special
name, the ampere (abbreviated amp or A), after the French physicist André Ampère
(1775–1836). Thus,
Smaller units of current are often used, such as
the milliampere

1 A = 1 C(cid:2)s.
A1 mA = 10–3 AB

A1 mA = 10–6 AB.

and microampere

A current can flow in a circuit only if there is a continuous conducting path.
We then have a complete circuit. If there is a break in the circuit, say, a cut wire,
we call it an open circuit and no current flows. In any single circuit, with only a single
path for current to follow such as in Fig. 18–6b, a steady current at any instant is the
same at one point (say, point A) as at any other point (such as B). This follows
from the conservation of electric charge: charge doesn’t disappear. A battery does
not create (or destroy) any net charge, nor does a lightbulb absorb or destroy charge.

C A U T I O N
A battery does not create charge;
a lightbulb does not destroy charge

EXAMPLE 18;1
Current is flow of charge. A steady current of 2.5 A exists
in a wire for 4.0 min. (a) How much total charge passes by a given point in the
circuit during those 4.0 min? (b) How many electrons would this be?
APPROACH (a) Current is flow of charge per unit time, Eq. 18–1, so the amount of
charge passing a point is the product of the current and the time interval. (b) To get
the number of electrons, we divide the total charge by the charge on one electron.
(=  240 s)
SOLUTION (a) Since the current was 2.5 A, or
the total charge that flowed past a given point in the wire was, from Eq. 18–1,

then in 4.0 min

2.5 C(cid:2)s,

¢Q = I ¢t = (2.5 C(cid:2)s)(240 s) = 600 C.

(b) The charge on one electron is

1.60 * 10–19 C,

so 600 C would consist of

600 C
1.6 * 10–19 C(cid:2)electron

= 3.8 * 1021 electrons.

504 CHAPTER 18

EXERCISE A If 1 million electrons per second pass a point in a wire, what is the current?

CONCEPTUAL EXAMPLE 18;2
How to connect a battery. What is wrong
with each of the schemes shown in Fig. 18–7 for lighting a flashlight bulb with a
flashlight battery and a single wire?

RESPONSE (a) There  is  no  closed  path  for  charge  to  flow  around. Charges
might briefly start to flow from the battery toward the lightbulb, but there they
run into a “dead end,” and the flow would immediately come to a stop.
(b) Now there is a closed path passing to and from the lightbulb; but the wire
touches only one battery terminal, so there is no potential difference in the cir-
cuit to make the charge move. Neither here, nor in (a), does the bulb light up.
(c) Nothing is wrong here. This is a complete circuit: charge can flow out from
one terminal of the battery, through the wire and the bulb, and into the other
terminal. This scheme will light the bulb.

or

In many real circuits, wires are connected to a common conductor that pro-
vides continuity. This common conductor is called ground, usually represented as
, and really is connected to the ground for a building or house. In a car,
one terminal of the battery is called “ground,” but is not connected to the earth
itself—it is connected to the frame of the car, as is one connection to each lightbulb
and other devices. Thus the car frame is a conductor in each circuit, ensuring a
continuous  path  for  charge  flow, and  is  called  “ground” for  the  car’s  circuits.
(Note that the car frame is well insulated from the earth by the rubber tires.)

We saw in Chapter 16 that conductors contain many free electrons. Thus, if a
continuous conducting wire is connected to the terminals of a battery, negatively
charged electrons flow in the wire. When the wire is first connected, the potential
difference between the terminals of the battery sets up an electric field inside the
wire and parallel to it. Free electrons at one end of the wire are attracted into
the positive terminal, and at the same time other electrons enter the other end of the
wire at the negative terminal of the battery. There is a continuous flow of electrons
throughout the wire that begins as soon as the wire is connected to both terminals.
When  the  conventions  of  positive  and  negative  charge  were  invented  two
centuries  ago, however, it  was  assumed  that  positive  charge  flowed  in  a  wire.
For  nearly  all  purposes, positive  charge  flowing  in  one  direction  is  exactly
equivalent  to  negative  charge  flowing  in  the  opposite  direction, as  shown  in
Fig. 18–8. Today, we still use the historical convention of positive charge flow when
discussing the direction of a current. So when we speak of the current direction
in a circuit, we mean the direction positive charge would flow. This is sometimes
referred to as conventional current. When we want to speak of the direction of
electron flow, we will specifically state it is the electron current. In liquids and
gases, both positive and negative charges (ions) can move.

+

–

+

–

+

–

(a)

(b)

(c)

FIGURE 18–7 Example 18–2.

FIGURE 18–8 Conventional current
from
negative electron flow from

is equivalent to a
–

to ±.

to

–

±

Conventional
current

Electron
flow

Device

Conventional current

Electron current

+ –

C A U T I O N
Distinguish conventional current
from electron flow

In practical life, such as rating the total charge of a car battery, you may see

the unit ampere-hour
EXERCISE B How many coulombs is 1.00 A(cid:2)h?

: from Eq. 18–1,

(A(cid:2)h)

¢Q = I ¢t
.

18–3 Ohm’s Law: Resistance and Resistors

To produce an electric current in a circuit, a difference in potential is required.
One way of producing a potential difference along a wire is to connect its ends to
the opposite terminals of a battery. It was Georg Simon Ohm (1787–1854) who
established experimentally that the current in a metal wire is proportional to the
potential difference V applied to its two ends:

I r V.

If, for example, we connect a wire to the two terminals of a 6-V battery, the cur-
rent in the wire will be twice what it would be if the wire were connected to a 3-V
battery. It is also found that reversing the sign of the voltage does not affect the
magnitude of the current.

SECTION 18–3 505

Exactly how large the current is in a wire depends not only on the voltage
between its ends, but also on the resistance the wire offers to the flow of electrons.
Electron  flow  is  impeded  because  of  collisions  with  the  atoms  of  the  wire. We
define electrical resistance R as the proportionality factor between the voltage V
(between the ends of the wire) and the current I (passing through the wire):

OHM’S “LAW”

V = IR.

(18;2)

I

0

I

0

(a)

(b)

Δ
Δ

I
V

=

1
R

=

slope

V

V

FIGURE 18–9 Graphs of current vs.
voltage (a) for a metal conductor
which obeys Ohm’s law, and (b) for
a nonohmic device, in this case a
semiconductor diode.

FIGURE 18–10 Flashlight
(Example 18–3). Note how the circuit
is completed along the side strip.

1.5 V on

off

V = IR,

Ohm found experimentally that in metal conductors R is a constant independent
of V, a result known as Ohm’s law. Equation 18–2,
is itself sometimes
called Ohm’s law, but only when referring to materials or devices for which R is
a  constant  independent  of  V. But  R is  not  a  constant  for  many  substances
other than metals, nor for devices such as diodes, vacuum tubes, transistors, and
so on. Even for metals, R is not constant if the temperature changes much: for
a  lightbulb  filament  the  measured  resistance  is  low  for  small  currents, but
is  much  higher  at  the  filament’s  normal  large  operating  current  that  puts  it
at  the  high  temperature  needed  to  make  it  glow  ( 3000 K). Thus  Ohm’s
“law” is  not  a  fundamental  law  of  nature, but  rather  a  description  of  a  certain
class of materials: metal conductors, whose temperature does not change much.
Such  materials  are  said  to  be “ohmic.” Materials  or  devices  that  do  not  follow
Ohm’s law are said to be nonohmic. See Fig. 18–9.

L

The unit for resistance is called the ohm and is abbreviated

letter omega). Because

R = V(cid:2)I,

we see that

1.0 (cid:3)

is equivalent to

(Greek capital
1.0 V(cid:2)A.

(cid:3)

Flashlight bulb resistance. A small flashlight bulb (Fig. 18–10)
EXAMPLE 18;3
draws 300 mA from its 1.5-V battery. (a) What is the resistance of the bulb?
(b) If the battery becomes weak and the voltage drops to 1.2 V, how would the
current change? Assume the bulb is approximately ohmic.
APPROACH We apply Ohm’s law to the bulb, where the voltage applied across
it is the battery voltage.
SOLUTION (a) We change 300 mA to 0.30 A and use Eq. 18–2:

R =

V
I

= 1.5 V
0.30 A

= 5.0 (cid:3).

(b) If the resistance stays the same, the current would be
= 1.2 V
5.0 (cid:3)

= 0.24 A = 240 mA,

V
R

I =

or a decrease of 60 mA.
NOTE With the smaller current in part (b), the bulb filament’s temperature would
be lower and the bulb less bright. Also, resistance does depend on temperature
(Section 18–4), so our calculation is only a rough approximation.

EXERCISE C What is the resistance of a lightbulb if 0.50 A flows through it when 120 V
is connected across it?

All  electric  devices, from  heaters  to  lightbulbs  to  stereo  amplifiers, offer
resistance to the flow of current. The filaments of lightbulbs (Fig. 18–5) and electric
heaters are special types of wires whose resistance results in their becoming very
hot. Generally, the connecting wires have very low resistance in comparison to the
resistance of the wire filaments or coils, so the connecting wires usually have a
minimal effect on the magnitude of the current.†

†A useful analogy compares the flow of electric charge in a wire to the flow of water in a river, or in a
pipe, acted on by gravity. If the river (or pipe) is nearly level, the flow rate is small. But if one end is
somewhat higher than the other, the water flow rate—or current—is greater. The greater the differ-
ence in height, the swifter the current. We saw in Chapter 17 that electric potential is analogous to the
height of a cliff for gravity. Just as an increase in height can cause a greater flow of water, so a greater
electric potential difference, or voltage, causes a greater electric current. Resistance in a wire is analogous
to rocks in a river that retard water flow.

506 CHAPTER 18 Electric Currents

In many circuits, particularly in electronic devices, resistors are used to con-
trol the amount of current. Resistors have resistances ranging from less than an
ohm to millions of ohms (see Figs. 18–11 and 18–12). The main types are “wire-
wound” resistors  which  consist  of  a  coil  of  fine  wire, “composition” resistors
which  are  usually  made  of  carbon, resistors  made  of  thin  carbon  or  metal
films, and (on tiny integrated circuit “chips”) undoped semiconductors.

When we draw a diagram of a circuit, we use the symbol

[resistor symbol]

to indicate a resistance. Wires whose resistance is negligible, however, are shown
simply as straight lines. Figure 18–12 and its Table show one way to specify the
resistance of a resistor.

FIGURE 18–11 Photo of resistors (striped),
plus other devices on a circuit board.

Resistor Color Code

Color

Number  Multiplier

Tolerance

0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9

Black
Brown
Red
Orange
Yellow
Green
Blue
Violet
Gray
White
Gold
Silver
No color

1
101
102
103
104
105
106
107
108
109
10–1
10–2

1%
2%

5%
10%
20%

FIGURE 18–12 The resistance value of a given resistor is written on
the exterior, or may be given as a color code as shown below and in
the Table: the first two colors represent the first two digits in the value
of the resistance, the third color represents the power of ten that it
must be multiplied by, and the fourth is the manufactured tolerance.
For example, a resistor whose four colors are red, green, yellow, and
silver has a resistance of
plus or
minus 10%. [An alternative code is a number such as 104, which means
R = 1.0 * 104 (cid:3).
]

25 * 104 (cid:3) = 250,000 (cid:3) = 250 k(cid:3),

First digit
Second digit
Multiplier
Tolerance

CONCEPTUAL EXAMPLE 18;4
Current and potential. Current I enters
a resistor R as shown in Fig. 18–13. (a) Is the potential higher at point A or at
point B? (b) Is the current greater at point A or at point B?
–,

RESPONSE (a) Positive charge always flows from
from high potential
to low potential. So if current I is conventional (positive) current, point A is at
a higher potential than point B.
(b) Conservation of charge requires that whatever charge flows into the resistor
at point A, an equal amount of charge emerges at point B. Charge or current
does not get “used up” by a resistor. So the current is the same at A and B.

to

±

An electric potential decrease, as from point A to point B in Example 18–4,

is often called a potential drop or a voltage drop.

Some Helpful Clarifications
Here we briefly summarize some possible misunderstandings and clarifications.
Batteries  do  not  put  out  a  constant  current. Instead, batteries  are  intended  to
maintain a constant potential difference, or very nearly so. (Details in the next
Chapter.) Thus a battery should be considered a source of voltage. The voltage is
applied across a wire or device.

Electric current passes through a wire or device (connected to a battery), and
its magnitude depends on that device’s resistance. The resistance is a property of
the wire or device. The voltage, on the other hand, is external to the wire or device,
and is applied across the two ends of the wire or device. The current through the
device might be called the “response”: the current increases if the voltage increases
or the resistance decreases, as I = V(cid:2)R.

FIGURE 18–13 Example 18–4.

I

A

R

B

C A U T I O N
Voltage is applied across a device;
current passes through a device

SECTION 18–3 Ohm’s Law: Resistance and Resistors

507

Current is not a vector, even though current does have a direction. In a thin
wire, the direction of the current is always parallel to the wire at each point, no
matter how the wire curves, just like water in a pipe. The direction of conven-
tional (positive) current is from high potential

toward lower potential

(–).

(±)

C A U T I O N
Current is not consumed

Current and charge do not increase or decrease or get “used up” when going
through  a  wire  or  other  device. The  amount  of  charge  that  goes  in  at  one  end
comes out at the other end.

18–4 Resistivity

It is found experimentally that the resistance R of a uniform wire is directly pro-
portional to its length  and inversely proportional to its cross-sectional area A.
That is,

l

R = r

,

(18;3)

l
A

r

r,

where  (Greek letter “rho”), the constant of proportionality, is called the resistivity
and depends on the material used. Typical values of  whose units are
(see
Eq. 18–3), are  given  for  various  materials  in  the  middle  column  of Table  18–1
which is divided into the categories conductors, insulators, and semiconductors
(Section 16–3). The values depend somewhat on purity, heat treatment, temper-
ature, and other factors. Notice that silver has the lowest resistivity and is thus
the  best  conductor  (although  it  is  expensive). Copper  is  close, and  much  less
expensive, which is why most wires are made of copper. Aluminum, although it
has a higher resistivity, is much less dense than copper; it is thus preferable to
copper in some situations, such as for transmission lines, because its resistance
for the same weight is less than that for copper.†

(cid:3)(cid:2)m

EXERCISE D Return to the Chapter-Opening Question, page 501, and answer it again
now. Try to explain why you may have answered differently the first time.

†The reciprocal of the resistivity, called the electrical conductivity, is

s = 1(cid:2)r

and has units of A(cid:3)(cid:2) mB –1.

TABLE 18–1 Resistivity and Temperature Coefficients (at 20°C)

Material

Conductors
Silver
Copper
Gold
Aluminum
Tungsten
Iron
Platinum
Mercury
Nichrome (Ni, Fe, Cr alloy)

Semiconductors‡

Carbon (graphite)
Germanium
Silicon
Insulators
Glass
Hard rubber

Resistivity,
R ((cid:3) (cid:4) m)

1.59 * 10–8
1.68 * 10–8
2.44 * 10–8
2.65 * 10–8
5.6 * 10–8
9.71 * 10–8
10.6 * 10–8
* 10–8
98
* 10–8
100

(3–60) * 10–5
(1–500) * 10–3

0.1–60

109–1012
1013–1015

Temperature

Coefficient,

A (C°)(cid:2)1

0.0061
0.0068
0.0034
0.00429
0.0045
0.00651
0.003927
0.0009
0.0004

–
–
–

0.0005
0.05
0.07

‡ Values depend strongly on the presence of even slight amounts of impurities.

508 CHAPTER 18 Electric Currents

10 (cid:3).
EXERCISE E A copper wire has a resistance of
had the same diameter but was only half as long? (a)
(e) none of these.

What would its resistance be if it
20 (cid:3),
1 (cid:3),

10 (cid:3),

5 (cid:3),

(b)

(c)

(d)

EXAMPLE 18;5
Speaker wires. Suppose you want to connect your stereo to
remote speakers (Fig. 18–14). (a) If each wire must be 20 m long, what diameter
copper wire should you use to keep the resistance less than
per wire?
(b) If the current to each speaker is 4.0 A, what is the potential difference, or
voltage drop, across each wire?
APPROACH We solve Eq. 18–3 to get the area A, from which we can calculate
the wire’s radius using
The diameter is 2r. In (b) we can use Ohm’s
law,
SOLUTION (a) We  solve  Eq. 18–3  for  the  area  A and  find
Table 18–1:

A = pr2.

V = IR.

0.10 (cid:3)

for  copper  in

r

0 m

2

0 m

2

A = r

l
R

=

A1.68 * 10–8 (cid:3)(cid:2)mB(20 m)
(0.10 (cid:3))

= 3.4 * 10–6 m2.

FIGURE 18–14 Example 18–5.

The cross-sectional area A of a circular wire is
be at least

A = pr2.

The radius must then

r =

A
p

B

= 1.04 * 10–3 m = 1.04 mm.

The diameter is twice the radius and so must be at least
(b) From

we find that the voltage drop across each wire is

V = IR

2r = 2.1 mm.

V = IR = (4.0 A)(0.10 (cid:3)) = 0.40 V.

NOTE The voltage drop across the wires reduces the voltage that reaches the
speakers from the stereo amplifier, thus reducing the sound level a bit.

CONCEPTUAL EXAMPLE 18;6
Stretching changes resistance. Suppose
a wire of resistance R could be stretched uniformly until it was twice its original
length. What would happen to its resistance? Assume the amount of material,
and therefore its volume, doesn’t change.

RESPONSE If the length  doubles, then the cross-sectional area A is halved,
of the wire remains the same. From Eq. 18–3 we
because the volume
see that the resistance would increase by a factor of four A2(cid:2)1

(V = Al)

= 4B.

2

l

EXERCISE F Copper wires in houses typically have a diameter of about 1.5 mm. How
long a wire would have a

resistance?

1.0-(cid:3)

Temperature Dependence of Resistivity
The resistivity of a material depends somewhat on temperature. The resistance of
metals generally increases with temperature. This is not surprising, because at higher
temperatures, the atoms are moving more rapidly and are arranged in a less orderly
fashion. So they might be expected to interfere more with the flow of electrons. If
the temperature change is not too great, the resistivity of metals usually increases
nearly linearly with temperature. That is,

r
T

= r

C1 + aAT - T
0

B D

0

(18;4)

r
0

is the resistivity at a temperature T, and

is the resistivity at some reference temperature

where
(such as 0°C or 20°C),
r
is the temperature coefficient of
T
resistivity. Values for  are given in Table 18–1. Note that the temperature coefficient
for semiconductors can be negative. Why? It seems that at higher temperatures,
some of the electrons that are normally not free in a semiconductor become free
and can contribute to the current. Thus, the resistance of a semiconductor can
decrease with an increase in temperature.

a

a

T
0

SECTION 18–4 Resistivity

509

P H Y S I C S   A P P L I E D
Resistance thermometer

164.2 (cid:3).

EXAMPLE 18;7
Resistance thermometer. The variation in electrical resis-
tance with temperature can be used to make precise temperature measurements.
Platinum is commonly used since it is relatively free from corrosive effects and has
a high melting point. Suppose at 20.0°C the resistance of a platinum resistance
thermometer is
When placed in a particular solution, the resistance is
187.4 (cid:3).
r,
APPROACH Since the resistance R is directly proportional to the resistivity
we can combine Eq. 18–3 with Eq. 18–4 to find R as a function of temperature T,
and then solve that equation for T.
SOLUTION Equation  18–3  tells  us
(l(cid:2)A)

What is the temperature of this solution?

so  we  multiply  Eq. 18–4  by

R = rl(cid:2)A,

to obtain

R = R
0

C1 + aAT - T
0

B D.

R
0

= r
0

Here
a
equation for T and find (see Table 18–1 for  )

is  the  resistance  of  the  wire  at

l(cid:2)A

T
0

= 20.0°C.

We  solve  this

FIGURE 18–15 A thermistor only
13 mm long, shown next to a
millimeter ruler.

T = T
0

+

R - R
0
aR
0

= 20.0°C +

187.4 (cid:3) - 164.2 (cid:3)
A3.927 * 10–3(C°)–1B(164.2 (cid:3))

= 56.0°C.

NOTE Resistance thermometers have the advantage that they can be used at
very high or low temperatures where gas or liquid thermometers would be useless.
NOTE More  convenient  for  some  applications  is  a  thermistor (Fig. 18–15),
which consists of a metal oxide or semiconductor whose resistance also varies in
a repeatable way with temperature. Thermistors can be made quite small and
respond very quickly to temperature changes.

EXERCISE G The resistance of the tungsten filament of a common incandescent light-
bulb is how many times greater at its operating temperature of 2800 K than its resistance
at  room  temperature? (a)  Less  than  1% greater; (b)  roughly  10% greater; (c)  about
2 times greater; (d) roughly 10 times greater; (e) more than 100 times greater.

a

The value of

in Eq. 18–4 can itself depend on temperature, so it is impor-
tant to check the temperature range of validity of any value (say, in a handbook
of physical data). If the temperature range is wide, Eq. 18–4 is not adequate and
terms proportional to the square and cube of the temperature are needed, but
these terms are generally very small except when

is large.

T - T
0

FIGURE 18–16 Hot electric stove
burner glows because of energy
transformed by electric current.

18–5 Electric Power

Electric energy is useful to us because it can be easily transformed into other
forms of energy. Motors transform electric energy into mechanical energy, and
are examined in Chapter 20.

In  other  devices  such  as  electric  heaters, stoves, toasters, and  hair  dryers,
electric energy is transformed into thermal energy in a wire resistance known as a
“heating element.” And in an ordinary lightbulb, the tiny wire filament (Fig. 18–5
and Chapter-Opening Photo) becomes so hot it glows; only a few percent of the
energy is transformed into visible light, and the rest, over 90%, into thermal energy.
Lightbulb filaments and heating elements (Fig. 18–16) in household appliances have
resistances typically of a few ohms to a few hundred ohms.

Electric energy is transformed into thermal energy or light in such devices,
and there are many collisions between the moving electrons and the atoms of the
wire. In each collision, part of the electron’s kinetic energy is transferred to the
atom with which it collides. As a result, the kinetic energy of the wire’s atoms
increases and hence the temperature (Section 13–9) of the wire element increases.
The  increased thermal  energy  can  be  transferred  as  heat  by  conduction  and
convection to the air in a heater or to food in a pan, by radiation to bread in a
toaster, or radiated as light.

510 CHAPTER 18 Electric Currents

To find the power transformed by an electric device, recall that the energy
transformed  when  a  charge  Q moves  through  a  potential  difference  V is QV
(Eq. 17–3). Then the power P, which is the rate energy is transformed, is

P =

energy transformed
time

=

QV
t

.

The charge that flows per second,

Q(cid:2)t,

is the electric current I. Thus we have

P = IV.

(18;5)

This general relation gives us the power transformed by any device, where I is the
current passing through it and V is the potential difference across it. It also gives
the power delivered by a source such as a battery. The SI unit of electric power is
the same as for any kind of power, the watt

(1 W = 1 J(cid:2)s).

The  rate  of  energy  transformation  in  a  resistance  R can  be  written  in  two
and substituting in Ohm’s

P = IV

other ways, starting with the general relation
law,

V = IR:

P = IV = I(IR) = I2R
V2
R

P = IV = a

b V =

V
R

.

(18;6a)

(18;6b)

Equations  18–6a  and  b  apply  only  to  resistors, whereas  Eq. 18–5,
more general and applies to any device.

P = IV,

is

Headlights. Calculate the resistance of a 40-W automobile

EXAMPLE 18;8
headlight designed for 12 V (Fig. 18–17).
APPROACH We solve for R in Eq. 18–6b, which has the given variables.
SOLUTION From Eq. 18–6b,

R =

V2
P

=

(12 V)2
(40 W)

= 3.6 (cid:3).

12 V

40-W Headlight

FIGURE 18–17 Example 18–8.

NOTE This is the resistance when the bulb is burning brightly at 40 W. When
the bulb is cold, the resistance is much lower, as we saw in Eq. 18–4 (see also
Exercise G). Since the current is high when the resistance is low, lightbulbs burn
out most often when first turned on.

P H Y S I C S   A P P L I E D
Why lightbulbs burn out when
first turned on

C A U T I O N
You pay for energy, which
is power

time, not for power

*

It is energy, not power, that you pay for on your electric bill. Since power is the
rate energy is transformed, the total energy used by any device is simply its power
consumption multiplied by the time it is on. If the power is in watts and the time is
in  seconds, the  energy  will  be  in  joules  since
Electric  companies
usually  specify  the  energy  with  a  much  larger  unit, the  kilowatt-hour (kWh).
One kWh = (1000 W)(3600 s) = 3.60 * 106 J.

1 W = 1 J(cid:2)s.

EXAMPLE 18;9
Electric heater. An electric heater draws a steady 15.0 A
on a 120-V line. How much power does it require and how much does it cost per
month (30 days) if it operates 3.0 h per day and the electric company charges
9.2 cents per kWh?
APPROACH We  use  Eq. 18–5,
to  find  the  power. We  multiply  the
power (in kW) by the time (h) used in a month and by the cost per energy unit,
$0.092 per kWh, to get the cost per month.
SOLUTION The power is

P = IV,

P = IV = (15.0 A)(120 V)

= 1800 W = 1.80 kW.

would  cost

9.2¢(cid:2)kWh

(3.0 h(cid:2)d)(30 d)
(1.80 kW)(90 h)($0.092(cid:2)kWh) = $15,

The  time  (in  hours)  the  heater  is  used  per  month  is
which  at
this heater.
NOTE Household  current  is  actually  alternating  (ac), but  our  solution  is  still
valid assuming the given values for V and I are the proper averages (rms) as we
discuss in Section 18–7.

= 90 h,
just  for

SECTION 18–5 Electric Power

511

P H Y S I C S   A P P L I E D
Lightning

FIGURE 18–18 Example 18–10.
A lightning bolt.

109 J

5 * 107 V

EXAMPLE 18;10 ESTIMATE
Lightning bolt. Lightning is a spectacular
example of electric current in a natural phenomenon (Fig. 18–18). There is much
of energy
variability to lightning bolts, but a typical event might transfer
across a potential difference of perhaps
during a time interval of about
0.2 s. Use this information to estimate (a) the total amount of charge transferred
between cloud and ground, (b) the current in the lightning bolt, and (c) the
average power delivered over the 0.2 s.
APPROACH We estimate the charge Q, recalling that potential energy change
¢V
times  the  charge  Q, Eq. 17–3. We  equate
equals  the  potential  difference
Q(cid:2)t
¢pe
¢pe L 109 J.
with  the  energy  transferred,
(Eq. 18–1) and the power P is energy/time.
SOLUTION (a) From Eq. 17–3, the energy transformed is
solve for Q:

Next, the  current  I is

¢pe = Q ¢V.

We

Q =

¢pe
¢V

L

109 J
5 * 107 V

= 20 coulombs.

(b) The current during the 0.2 s is about

I =

Q
t

L 20 C
0.2 s

= 100 A.

(c) The average power delivered is

P =

energy
time

= 109 J
0.2 s

= 5 * 109 W = 5 GW.

We can also use Eq. 18–5:

P = IV = (100 A)(5 * 107 V) = 5 GW.

NOTE Since most lightning bolts consist of several stages, it is possible that indi-
vidual parts could carry currents much higher than the 100 A calculated above.

EXERCISE H Since
through one meter to do the equivalent amount of work?

1 kWh = 3.6 * 106 J,

how much mass must be lifted against gravity

P H Y S I C S   A P P L I E D
Safety—wires getting hot

P H Y S I C S   A P P L I E D
Fuses, circuit breakers, and shorts

18–6 Power in Household Circuits

I2R,

The electric wires that carry electricity to lights and other electric appliances in
houses  and  buildings  have  some  resistance, although  usually  it  is  quite  small.
Nonetheless, if the current is large enough, the wires will heat up and produce
thermal energy at a rate equal to
where R is the wire’s resistance. One possi-
ble hazard is that the current-carrying wires in the wall of a building may become
so hot as to start a fire. Thicker wires have less resistance (see Eq. 18–3) and thus
can  carry  more  current  without  becoming  too  hot. When  a  wire  carries  more
current than is safe, it is said to be “overloaded.” To prevent overloading, fuses or
circuit breakers are installed in circuits. They are basically switches (Fig. 18–19, top
of  next  page)  that  open  the  circuit  when  the  current  exceeds  a  safe  value.
A  20-A  fuse  or  circuit  breaker, for  example, opens  when  the  current  passing
through it exceeds 20 A. If a circuit repeatedly burns out a fuse or opens a circuit
breaker, and no connected device requires more than 20 A, there are two possi-
bilities: there may be too many devices drawing current in that circuit; or there is
a fault somewhere, such as a “short.” A short, or “short circuit,” means that two
wires have touched that should not have (perhaps because the insulation has worn
through)  so  the  path  of  the  current  is  shortened  through  a  path  of  very  low
resistance. With  reduced  resistance, the  current  becomes  very  large  and  can
make a wire hot enough to start a fire. Short circuits should be remedied immediately.

512 CHAPTER 18 Electric Currents

Compressed
spring

Contact
points

Contacts open

Outside
switch

Bimetallic
strip

Fuse
ribbon or
fine wire

Metal
rod

To electric
circuit

(a) Types of fuses

(b) Circuit breaker
             (closed)

(c) Circuit breaker
              (open)

Household circuits are designed with the various devices connected so that
each receives the standard voltage (Fig. 18–20) from the electric company (usually
120 V in the United States). Circuits with the devices arranged as in Fig. 18–20
are called parallel circuits, as we will discuss in the next Chapter. When a fuse
blows or circuit breaker opens, it is important to check the total current being
drawn on that circuit, which is the sum of the currents in each device.

Will a fuse blow? Determine the total current drawn by

EXAMPLE 18;11
all the devices in the circuit of Fig. 18–20.
APPROACH Each device has the same 120-V voltage across it. The current each
draws from the source is found from
SOLUTION The  circuit  in  Fig. 18–20  draws  the  following  currents: the  light-
1800 W(cid:2)120 V =
bulb draws
175 W(cid:2)120 V = 1.5 A;
15.0 A;
and
The  total  current  drawn, if  all
the  hair  dryer  draws
devices are used at the same time, is

I = P(cid:2)V = 100 W(cid:2)120 V = 0.8 A;
the power amplifier draws a maximum of

1500 W(cid:2)120 V = 12.5 A.

the heater draws

I = P(cid:2)V,

Eq. 18–5.

FIGURE 18–19 (a) Fuses. When current
exceeds a certain value, the metallic
ribbon or wire inside melts and the circuit
opens. Then the fuse must be replaced.
(b) One type of circuit breaker. Current
passes through a bimetallic strip. When
the current exceeds a safe level, the heating
of the bimetallic strip causes the strip to
bend so far to the left that the notch in the
spring-loaded metal rod drops down over
the end of the bimetallic strip (c) and the
circuit opens at the contact points (one is
attached to the rod) and the outside switch
is also flipped. When the bimetallic strip
cools, it can be reset using the outside switch.
Better magnetic-type circuit breakers are
discussed in Chapters 20 and 21.

FIGURE 18–20 Connection of
household appliances.

Switch

Lightbulb
100 W

Electric heater
1800 W

0.8 A + 15.0 A + 1.5 A + 12.5 A = 29.8 A.

NOTE The heater draws as much current as 18 100-W lightbulbs. For safety, the
heater should probably be on a circuit by itself.

Power amplifier
175 W

If the circuit in Fig. 18–20 is designed for a 20-A fuse, the fuse should blow,
and we hope it will, to prevent overloaded wires from getting hot enough to start
a fire. Something will have to be turned off to get this circuit below 20 A. (Houses
and  apartments  usually  have  several  circuits, each  with  its  own  fuse  or  circuit
breaker; try moving one of the devices to another circuit.) If the circuit is designed
with heavier wire and a 30-A fuse, the fuse shouldn’t blow—if it does, a short may be
the problem. (The most likely place for a short is in the cord of one of the devices.)
Proper fuse size is selected according to the wire used to supply the current. A prop-
erly  rated  fuse  should  never be  replaced  by  a  higher-rated  one, even  in  a  car.
A  fuse  blowing  or  a  circuit  breaker  opening  is  acting  like  a  switch, making  an
“open circuit.” By an open circuit, we mean that there is no longer a complete
conducting path, so no current can flow; it is as if R = q.

CONCEPTUAL EXAMPLE 18;12
A  dangerous  extension  cord. Your
1800-W portable electric heater is too far from your desk to warm your feet. Its
cord is too short, so you plug it into an extension cord rated at 11 A. Why is this
dangerous?

RESPONSE 1800 W at 120 V draws a 15-A current. The wires in the extension
cord rated at 11 A could become hot enough to melt the insulation and cause a fire.

EXERCISE I How many 60-W 120-V lightbulbs can operate on a 20-A line? (a) 2; (b) 3;
(c) 6; (d) 20; (e) 40.

Fuse or
circuit
breaker

Hair dryer
1500 W

120 V
(from electric company)

P H Y S I C S   A P P L I E D

Proper fuses and shorts

P H Y S I C S   A P P L I E D
Extension cords and possible
danger

SECTION 18–6 Power in Household Circuits

513

t
n
e
r
r
u
C

I0

t
n
e
r
r
u
C

−I0

t

Time

(a) dc

Time

(b) ac

FIGURE 18–21 (a) Direct current,
and (b) alternating current, as
functions of time.

FIGURE 18–22 Power transformed
in a resistor in an ac circuit.

I 2
0 R

r
e
w
o
P

I 2R = 1

2 I 2
0R

Time

t

18–7 Alternating Current

When a battery is connected to a circuit, the current moves steadily in one direc-
tion. This is called a direct current, or dc. Electric generators at electric power
plants, however, produce alternating current, or ac. (Sometimes capital letters are
used, DC and AC.) An alternating current reverses direction many times per second
and is commonly sinusoidal, Fig. 18–21. The electrons in a wire first move in one
direction and then in the other. The current supplied to homes and businesses by
electric companies is ac throughout virtually the entire world. We will discuss and
analyze ac circuits in detail in Chapter 21. But because ac circuits are so common
in real life, we will discuss some of their basic aspects here.

The voltage produced by an ac electric generator is sinusoidal, as we shall see
later. The current it produces is thus sinusoidal (Fig. 18–21b). We can write the
voltage as a function of time as

t

V = V

v = 2pf.

0 sin 2pft = V
±V
0

0 sin vt.
(18;7a)
and
The potential V oscillates between
is referred to as the peak
voltage. The frequency f is the number of complete oscillations made per second,
and
In most areas of the United States and Canada, f is 60 Hz (the
unit “hertz,” as we saw in Chapters 8 and 11, means cycles per second). In many
countries, 50 Hz is used.
Equation 18–2,

works also for ac: if a voltage V exists across a resis-

V = IR,
tance R, then the current I through the resistance is

–V
0 ,

and

V
0

=

I
0

I =

V
R

= V
0

0 sin vt.

The quantity

V
R  sin vt = I
0
(cid:2)R
is the peak current. The current is considered posi-
tive when the electrons flow in one direction and negative when they flow in the
opposite direction. It is clear from Fig. 18–21b that an alternating current is as
often positive as it is negative. Thus, the average current is zero. This does not
mean, however, that no power is needed or that no heat is produced in a resistor.
Electrons  do  move  back  and  forth, and  do  produce  heat. Indeed, the  power
transformed in a resistance R at any instant is (Eq. 18–7b)

(18;7b)

P = I2R = I

2 R sin2 vt.

0

Because  the  current  is  squared, we  see  that  the  power  is  always  positive, as
sin2 vt
graphed in Fig. 18–22. The quantity
varies between 0 and 1; and it is not
as indicated in Fig. 18–22. Thus,
too difficult to show† that its average value is
the average power transformed,

P,

1
2 ,

is

P = 1
2

I

2R.
0

Since power can also be written
the average power is

P = 1
2

V
2
0
R

.

P = V2(cid:2)R = AV

2(cid:2)RB sin2 vt,

0

we also have that

The average or mean value of the square of the current or voltage is thus what
is important for calculating average power:
The square
root of each of these is the rms (root-mean-square) value of the current or voltage:

Z = 1
2

Y = 1
2

and

2 .
0

V

I

2
0

Irms = 3Y =

Vrms = 3Z =

I
0
22
V
0
22

= 0.707 I

0 ,

= 0.707 V
0 .

(18;8a)

(18;8b)

cos2 vt

t
†A graph of
(by cycle) on the time axis. Thus the average value of
will be the same. From the trigonometric identity

is identical to that for

versus

sin2 vt
sin2

1
4

in Fig. 18–22, except that the points are shifted
averaged over one or more full cycles,
and

cos2,

sin2 u + cos2 u = 1,

we can write

514 CHAPTER 18 Electric Currents

Hence the average value of

Asin2 vtB + Acos2 vtB = 2Asin2 vtB = 1.
.

sin2 vt

is 1
2

The rms values of V and I are sometimes called the effective values. They are
useful because they can be substituted directly into the power formulas, Eqs. 18–5
and 18–6, to get the average power:

P = Irms Vrms

P = 1
2

I

2 R = Irms
0

2 R

P = 1
2

V
2
0
R

=

Vrms
2
R

.

(18;9a)

(18;9b)

(18;9c)

Thus, a direct current whose values of I and V equal the rms values of I and V for
an alternating current will produce the same power. Hence it is usually the rms
value of current and voltage that is specified or measured. For example, in the
Vrms ;
United States and Canada, standard line voltage is 120-V ac. The 120 V is
the peak voltage

is (Eq. 18–8b)

V
0
= 22 Vrms = 170 V.

V
0

Motor

Fan

Heating
coils

Switch

Cord

FIGURE 18–23 A hair dryer. Most
of the current goes through the
heating coils, a pure resistance;
a small part goes to the motor to turn
the fan. Example 18–13.

In much of the world (Europe, Australia, Asia) the rms voltage is 240 V, so the
peak voltage is 340 V. The line voltage can vary, depending on the total load; the
frequency of 60 Hz or 50 Hz, however, remains extremely steady.

EXAMPLE 18;13
Hair dryer. (a) Calculate the resistance and the peak cur-
rent in a 1500-W hair dryer (Fig. 18–23) connected to a 120-V ac line. (b) What
happens if it is connected to a 240-V ac line in Britain?
P
Vrms ,
APPROACH We are given
= 12 Irms .
Then we find R from
and
SOLUTION (a) We solve Eq. 18–9a for the rms current:

(Eq. 18–9a or 18–5),

so
V = IR.

Irms = P(cid:2)Vrms

and

I
0

Irms =

P
Vrms

= 1500 W
120 V

= 12.5 A.

Then

I
0

= 22 Irms = 17.7 A.

The resistance is

R =

Vrms
Irms

= 120 V
12.5 A

= 9.6 (cid:3).

The resistance could equally well be calculated using peak values:

R =

V
0
I
0

= 170 V
17.7 A

= 9.6 (cid:3).

(b) When connected to a 240-V line, more current would flow and the resistance
would change with the increased temperature (Section 18–4). But let us make
resistance.
an  estimate  of  the  power  transformed  based  on  the  same
The average power would be

9.6-(cid:3)

P =

=

Vrms
2
R
(240 V)2
(9.6 (cid:3))

= 6000 W.

This  is  four  times  the  dryer’s  power  rating  and  would  undoubtedly  melt  the
heating element or the wire coils of the motor.

This Section has given a brief introduction to the simpler aspects of alternat-
ing currents. We will discuss ac circuits in more detail in Chapter 21. In Chapter 19
we will deal with the details of dc circuits only.

SECTION 18–7 Alternating Current

515

+

B
E

–

dvB

in a

B
FIGURE 18–24 Electric field
E
wire gives electrons in random
vB
d .
motion a drift velocity
in the opposite direction of
because electrons have a negative
B B.
B = qE
charge AF

vB
Note
d
B
E

is

Al

FIGURE 18–25 Electrons in the
volume  will all pass through the
¢t,
cross section indicated in a time
where l = vd ¢t.

dvB

A

A

l = v
d

 Δt

516 CHAPTER 18

*

18–8 Microscopic View of Electric Current

It can be useful to analyze a simple model of electric current at the microscopic
level of atoms and electrons. In a conducting wire, for example, we can imagine the
free electrons as moving about randomly at high speeds, bouncing off the atoms of
the wire (somewhat like the molecules of a gas—Sections 13–8 to 13–10). When
an electric field exists in the wire, Fig. 18–24, the electrons feel a force and initially
begin to accelerate. But they soon reach a more or less steady average velocity
known as their drift velocity,
(collisions with atoms in the wire keep them from
accelerating further). The drift velocity is normally very much smaller than the
electrons’ average random speed.

vd

vd

We can relate

to the macroscopic current I in the wire. In a time

the
on average. Suppose the wire has cross-
electrons will travel a distance
sectional area A. Then in time
will
pass  through  the  cross  section  A of  wire, as  shown  in  Fig. 18–25. If  there
are n free electrons (each with magnitude of charge e) per unit volume, then the
total  number  of  electrons  is
(V is  volume, not  voltage)  and  the  total
charge

that passes through the area A in a time

l = vd ¢t
¢t,

electrons in a volume

V = Al =

Avd ¢t

N = nV

¢Q

¢t

is

¢t,

¢Q = (number of charges, N) * (charge per particle)

= (nV)(e) = AnAvd ¢tB(e).
The magnitude of the current I in the wire is thus

I =

¢Q
¢t

= neAvd .

(18;10)

EXAMPLE 18;14
Electron speed in wire. A copper wire 3.2 mm in diameter
carries a 5.0-A current. Determine the drift velocity of the free electrons. Assume
that one electron per Cu atom is free to move (the others remain bound to the atom).
APPROACH We apply Eq. 18–10 to find the drift velocity
if we can determine
the number n of free electrons per unit volume. Since we assume there is one
free electron per atom, the density of free electrons, n, is the same as the number
of Cu atoms per unit volume. The atomic mass of Cu is 63.5 u (see Periodic Table
free
inside  the  back  cover), so  63.5 g  of  Cu  contains  one  mole  or
n = N(cid:2)V,
electrons. To find the volume V of this amount of copper, and then
we use the mass density of copper (Table 10–1),
where
rD = m(cid:2)V.
SOLUTION The  number  of  free  electrons  per  unit  volume,
V = volume = m(cid:2)rD

rD = 8.9 * 103 kg(cid:2)m3,
r

to distinguish it here from

for resistivity.)

6.02 * 1023

n = N(cid:2)V

(We use

(where

), is

rD

vd

=

n =

N
V

N
m(cid:2)rD
n = ¢ 6.02 * 1023 electrons

=

N(1 mole)
m(1 mole)

rD

63.5 * 10–3 kg

≤ A8.9 * 103 kg(cid:2)m3B = 8.4 * 1028 m–3.

The  cross-sectional  area  of  the  wire  is
8.0 * 10–6 m2.

Then, by Eq. 18–10, the drift velocity has magnitude

A = pr2 = pA1.6 * 10–3 mB2 =

vd =

I
neA

=

5.0 A
A8.4 * 1028 m–3BA1.6 * 10–19 CBA8.0 * 10–6 m2B

= 4.6 * 10–5 m(cid:2)s L 0.05 mm(cid:2)s.

NOTE The actual speed of electrons bouncing around inside the metal is estimated
to be about

, very much greater than the drift velocity.

1.6 * 106 m(cid:2)s

20°C

at

The  drift  velocity  of  electrons  in  a  wire  is  slow, only  about

in
Example 18–14, which means it takes an electron about
to
travel only 1 m. This is not how fast “electricity travels”: when you flip a light
switch, the  light—even  if  many  meters  away—goes  on  nearly  instantaneously.
A3 * 108 m(cid:2)sB.
Why? Because electric fields travel essentially at the speed of light
We can think of electrons in a wire as being like a pipe full of water: when a little
water enters one end of the pipe, some water immediately comes out the other end.

20 * 103 s,

0.05 mm(cid:2)s
 h,

5 1
2

or

*

18–9 Superconductivity

At very low temperatures, well below 0°C, the resistivity (Section 18–4) of certain
metals and certain compounds or alloys becomes zero as measured by the highest-
precision  techniques. Materials  in  such  a  state  are  said  to  be  superconducting.
This phenomenon was first observed by H. K. Onnes (1853–1926) in 1911 when he
and found that the resistance of mercury
cooled mercury below 4.2 K
suddenly dropped to zero. In general, superconductors become superconducting
only below a certain transition temperature or critical temperature,
which is
usually within a few degrees of absolute zero. Current in a ring-shaped supercon-
ducting material has been observed to flow for years in the absence of a potential
r
difference, with no measurable decrease. Measurements show that the resistivity
4 * 10–25 (cid:3)(cid:2)m,
times smaller
of superconductors is less than
than that for copper, and is considered to be zero in practice. See Fig. 18–26.

which is over

(–269°C)

1016

TC ,

r

,
y
t
i
v
i
t
s
i
s
e
R

FIGURE 18–26 A superconducting
material has zero resistivity when its
temperature is below
its “critical
TC ,
temperature.” At temperatures above
the resistivity jumps to a “normal” nonzero
value and increases with temperature as
most materials do (Eq. 18–4).

TC ,

T

TC

Before  1986  the  highest  temperature  at  which  a  material  was  found  to
superconduct was 23 K, which required liquid helium to keep the material cold.
In  1987, a  compound  of  yttrium, barium, copper, and  oxygen  (YBCO)  was
developed that can be superconducting at 90 K. Since this is above the boiling
temperature of liquid nitrogen, 77 K, liquid nitrogen is sufficiently cold to keep
the  material  superconducting. This  was  an  important  breakthrough  because
liquid  nitrogen  is  much  more  easily  and  cheaply  obtained  than  is  the  liquid
helium  needed  for  earlier  superconductors. Superconductivity  at  temperatures
as high as 160 K has been reported, though in fragile compounds.

high-TC

To  develop

superconductors  for  use  as  wires  (such  as  for  wires  in
“superconducting  electromagnets”—Section  20–7), many  applications  today
utilize a bismuth-strontium-calcium-copper oxide (BSCCO). A major challenge
is how to make a useable, bendable wire out of the BSCCO, which is very brittle.
(One solution is to embed tiny filaments of the
superconductor in a metal
alloy, which is not resistanceless but has resistance much less than a conventional
copper cable.)

high-TC

*

18–10 Electrical Conduction in the

Human Nervous System
An interesting example of the flow of electric charge is in the human nervous system,
which provides us with the means for being aware of the world, for communication
within  the  body, and  for  controlling the  body’s  muscles. Although  the  detailed
functioning  of  the  hugely  complex  nervous  system  still  is  not  well  understood,
we do have a reasonable understanding of how messages are transmitted within
the  nervous  system: they  are  electrical  signals  passing  along  the  basic  element
of the nervous system, the neuron.

Neurons are living cells of unusual shape (Fig. 18–27). Attached to the main
cell body are several small appendages known as dendrites and a long tail called
the axon. Signals  are  received  by  the  dendrites  and  are  propagated  along  the
axon. When  a  signal  reaches  the  nerve  endings, it  is  transmitted  to  the  next
neuron or to a muscle at a connection called a synapse.

FIGURE 18–27 A simplified sketch
of a typical neuron.

Signal from another neuron

Synapse

Dendrites

Nucleus

Cell body

Axon
Myelin sheath
Node of Ranvier

Synapse

Nerve endings

Another neuron
or a muscle

*SECTION 18–10 Electrical Conduction in the Human Nervous System 517

TABLE 18–2
Concentrations of Ions Inside
and Outside a Typical Axon

Concentration  Concentration
outside axon
(mol(cid:5)m3)

inside axon
(mol(cid:5)m3)

K±
Na±
Cl–

140
15
9

5
140
125

Na+

+
–

K+

–
+

Extracellular
ﬂuid

Cl–

+
–

Axon

Membrane

–
+

–
+

FIGURE 18–28 How a dipole layer
of charge forms on a cell membrane.

FIGURE 18–29 Measuring the
potential difference between the
inside and outside of a nerve cell.

Voutside

Axon

Vinside

FIGURE 18–30 Action potential.

)

V
m

(
V

l
a
i
t
n
e
t
o
P

40

20

0

−20
−40
−60
−80

Time (ms)

1

2

3

4

Resting
potential

Action
potential

A neuron, before transmitting an electrical signal, is in the so-called “resting
state.” Like nearly all living cells, neurons have a net positive charge on the outer
surface  of  the  cell  membrane  and  a  negative  charge  on  the  inner  surface.
This  difference  in  charge, or  dipole  layer, means  that  a  potential  difference
exists across the cell membrane. When a neuron is not transmitting a signal, this
resting potential, normally stated as

Vinside - Voutside ,

–60 mV

–90 mV,

to

K±

Na±

Cl– .

K± , Na± ,

through a mechanism of active transport‡ of
Na±
ions, and less so of

depending on the type of organism. The most
is typically
common ions in a cell are
There are large differences in the
and
concentrations of these ions inside and outside an axon, as indicated by the typical
values given in Table 18–2. Other ions are also present, so the fluids both inside
and outside the axon are electrically neutral. Because of the differences in concentra-
tion, there is a tendency for ions to diffuse across the membrane (see Section 13–13
on diffusion). However, in the resting state the cell membrane prevents any net
Na±
ions out of the cell
flow of
attach; energy  needed  comes  from ATP.
by  a  particular  protein  to  which
Cl–
But it does allow the flow of
ions, and it is these two
ions  that  produce  the  dipole  charge  layer  on  the  membrane. Because  there  is
ions  tend
inside  the  cell  than  outside, more
a  greater  concentration  of
to  diffuse  outward  across  the  membrane  than  diffuse  inward. A
ion  that
passes  through  the  membrane  becomes  attached  to  the  outer  surface  of  the
membrane, and  leaves  behind  an  equal  negative  charge  that  lies  on  the  inner
surface  of  the  membrane  (Fig. 18–28). The  fluids  themselves  remain  neutral.
What keeps the ions on the membrane is their attraction for each other across
ions  tend  to  diffuse  into the  cell  since  their
the  membrane. Independently,
K±
concentration outside is higher. Both
diffusion tends to charge the
interior  surface  of  the  membrane  negative  and  the  outside  positive. As  charge
accumulates on the membrane surface, it becomes increasingly difficult for more
ions to diffuse:
ions trying to move outward, for example, are repelled by the
positive charge already there. Equilibrium is reached when the tendency to diffuse
because of the concentration difference is just balanced by the electrical potential
difference  across  the  membrane. The  greater  the  concentration  difference, the
greater the potential difference across the membrane (

–60 mV

–90 mV

K±
K±

and

Cl–

Cl–

K±

K±

to

).

The most important aspect of a neuron is not that it has a resting potential
(most cells do), but rather that it can respond to a stimulus and conduct an elec-
trical signal along its length. The stimulus could be thermal (when you touch a
hot stove) or chemical (as in taste buds); it could be pressure (as on the skin or at
the  eardrum), or  light  (as  in  the  eye); or  it  could  be  the  electric  stimulus  of  a
signal coming from the brain or another neuron. In the laboratory, the stimulus is
usually electrical and is applied by a tiny probe at some point on the neuron. If
the stimulus exceeds some threshold, a voltage pulse will travel down the axon.
This voltage pulse can be detected at a point on the axon using a voltmeter or an
oscilloscope connected as in Fig. 18–29. This voltage pulse has the shape shown
in  Fig. 18–30, and  is  called  an  action  potential. As  can  be  seen, the  potential
increases  from  a  resting  potential  of  about
and  becomes  a  positive
30 mV or 40 mV. The action potential lasts for about 1 ms and travels down an
axon with a speed of
When an action potential is stimulated,
to
the nerve is said to have “fired.”

150 m(cid:2)s.

–70 mV

30 m(cid:2)s

K±

and

Cl–

Na±

than to

ions. Thus,

What causes the action potential? At the point where the stimulus occurs, the
membrane suddenly alters its permeability, becoming much more permeable to
Na±
ions rush into the cell and the inner surface
of the wall becomes positively charged, and the potential difference quickly swings
in  Fig. 18–30). Just  as  suddenly, the  membrane  returns  to
positive  (
its original characteristics; it becomes impermeable to
and in fact pumps out
Na±
Cl–
ions again predominates and the original
in Fig. 18–30).
resting potential is restored (
‡This transport mechanism is sometimes referred to as the “sodium pump.”

K±
and
–70 mV

ions. The diffusion of

L ±30 mV

Na±

518 CHAPTER 18 Electric Currents

What causes the action potential to travel along the axon? The action potential
occurs at the point of stimulation, as shown in Fig. 18–31a. The membrane momen-
tarily is positive on the inside and negative on the outside at this point. Nearby
charges are attracted toward this region, as shown in Fig. 18–31b. The potential
in these adjacent regions then drops, causing an action potential there. Thus, as
the membrane returns to normal at the original point, nearby it experiences an
action potential, so the action potential moves down the axon (Figs. 18–31c and d).
You may wonder if the number of ions that pass through the membrane would
significantly alter the concentrations. The answer is no; and we can show why (and
again show the power and usefulness of physics) by treating the axon as a capacitor
as we do in Search and Learn Problem 8 (the concentration changes by less than
1 part in 104).

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Point of stimulation

–

Exterior

Membrane
–+
+
– + + – – – – – – – – – –
Interior

+ + + + + + + + +

–

+ + + + + + + + +

–+
+
– + + – – – – – – – – – –

– + +
+ – –

+–
+ –

+ + + + + + +
+
– – – – – – – –

+
–

+ +
– –

+
–

+–
+ –

+ + + + + +
+
– – – – – – –

Summary

An electric battery serves as a source of nearly constant poten-
tial  difference  by  transforming  chemical  energy  into  electric
energy. A  simple  battery  consists  of  two  electrodes  made  of
different metals immersed in a solution or paste known as an
electrolyte.

Electric  current, I, refers  to  the  rate  of  flow  of  electric
charge and is measured in amperes (A): 1 A equals a flow of
1 C(cid:2)s

past a given point.

The  direction  of  conventional  current is  that  of  positive
charge  flow. In  a  wire, it  is  actually  negatively  charged  elec-
trons  that  move, so  they  flow  in  a  direction  opposite  to  the
conventional current. A positive charge flow in one direction is
almost  always  equivalent  to  a  negative  charge  flow  in  the
opposite direction. Positive conventional current always flows
from a high potential to a low potential.

The resistance R of a device is defined by the relation

V = IR,

(18–2)
where I is the current in the device when a potential difference V
is applied across it. For materials such as metals, R is a constant
independent of V (thus
), a result known as Ohm’s law.
Thus, the current I coming from a battery of voltage V depends
on the resistance R of the circuit connected to it.

I r V

Voltage is applied across a device or between the ends of a
wire. Current passes through a wire or device. Resistance is a
property of the wire or device.

The unit of resistance is the ohm

See Table 18–3.

((cid:3)),

where

1 (cid:3) = 1 V(cid:2)A.

TABLE 18–3 Summary of Units

Current
Potential difference
Power
Resistance

1 A = 1 C(cid:2)s
1 V = 1 J(cid:2)C
1 W = 1 J(cid:2)s
1 (cid:3) = 1 V(cid:2)A

The resistance R of a wire is inversely proportional to its
l
cross-sectional area A, and directly proportional to its length
and to a property of the material called its resistivity:

R =

rl
A

.

(18–3)

r,
The resistivity,
semiconductors it may decrease.

increases with temperature for metals, but for

The rate at which energy is transformed in a resistance R
from electric to other forms of energy (such as heat and light)

Action potential moving right

FIGURE 18–31 Propagation of action
potential along axon membrane.

is equal to the product of current and voltage. That is, the power
transformed, measured in watts, is given by
P = IV,

(18–5)

which for resistors can be written as

P = I2R =

V2
R

.

(18–6)

The SI unit of power is the watt

(1 W = 1 J(cid:2)s).

The total electric energy transformed in any device equals
the product of the power and the time during which the device
(1 J = 1 W(cid:2) s),
is operated. In SI units, energy is given in joules
but  electric  companies  use  a  larger  unit, the  kilowatt-hour
A1 kWh = 3.6 * 106 JB.

Electric  current  can  be  direct  current (dc), in  which  the
current  is  steady  in  one  direction; or  it  can  be  alternating
current (ac), in which the current reverses direction at a particular
frequency f, typically 60 Hz. Alternating currents are typically
sinusoidal in time,

I = I

0 sin vt,

(18–7b)

where

v = 2pf,

and are produced by an alternating voltage.

The  rms values  of  sinusoidally  alternating  currents  and

voltages are given by

Irms =

  and  Vrms =

I
0
22

V
0
22

,

(18–8)

I
0

V
0

and
P = IV = I2R = V2(cid:2)R,

are the peak values. The power
respectively, where
relationship,
is valid for the average
power in alternating currents when the rms values of V and I
are used.

[ The current in a wire, at the microscopic level, is consid-
*
The current I is

ered to be a slow drift velocity of electrons,
given by

vB
d .

I = neAvd ,

(18–10)

where n is the number of free electrons per unit volume, e is
the magnitude of the charge on an electron, and A is the cross-
sectional area of the wire.]

*
[ At  very  low  temperatures  certain  materials  become
superconducting, which  means  their  electrical  resistance
becomes zero.]

*
[ The human nervous system operates via electrical con-
duction: when a nerve “fires,” an electrical signal travels as a
voltage pulse known as an action potential.]

Summary 519

Questions

1. When an electric cell is connected to a circuit, electrons flow
away from the negative terminal in the circuit. But within
the cell, electrons flow to the negative terminal. Explain.
2. When a flashlight is operated, what is being used up: bat-
tery current, battery voltage, battery energy, battery power,
or battery resistance? Explain.

3. What  quantity  is  measured  by  a  battery  rating  given  in
Explain.
4. Can  a  copper  wire  and  an  aluminum  wire  of  the  same

ampere-hours

(A(cid:2)h)?

length have the same resistance? Explain.

5. One  terminal  of  a  car  battery  is  said  to  be  connected  to
“ground.” Since  it  is  not  really  connected  to  the  ground,
what is meant by this expression?

P = V2(cid:2)R

6. The equation

indicates that the power dissipated
in a resistor decreases if the resistance is increased, whereas
the  equation
implies  the  opposite. Is  there  a
contradiction here? Explain.

P = I2R

7. What happens when a lightbulb burns out?
8. If the resistance of a small immersion heater (to heat water
for tea or soup, Fig. 18–32) was increased, would it speed up
or slow down the heating process? Explain.

FIGURE 18–32
Question 8.

MisConceptual Questions

1. When connected to a battery, a lightbulb glows brightly. If
the battery is reversed and reconnected to the bulb, the bulb
will glow
(a) brighter.
(b) dimmer.

(c) with the same brightness.
(d) not at all.
2. When a battery is connected to a lightbulb properly, cur-
rent flows through the lightbulb and makes it glow. How
much current flows through the battery compared with the
lightbulb?
(a) More.
(b) Less.
(c) The same amount.
(d) No current flows through the battery.

3. Which of the following statements about Ohm’s law is true?
(a) Ohm’s law relates the current through a wire to the

voltage across the wire.

(b) Ohm’s law holds for all materials.
(c) Any material that obeys Ohm’s law does so

independently of temperature.

(d) Ohm’s law is a fundamental law of physics.
(e) Ohm’s law is valid for superconductors.

520 CHAPTER 18 Electric Currents

9. If a rectangular solid made of carbon has sides of lengths a,
2a, and  3a, to  which  faces  would  you  connect  the  wires
from a battery so as to obtain (a) the least resistance, (b) the
greatest resistance?

10. Explain why lightbulbs almost always burn out just as they
are turned on and not after they have been on for some time.
11. Which draws more current, a 100-W lightbulb or a 75-W

bulb? Which has the higher resistance?

12. Electric  power  is  transferred  over  large  distances  at  very
high voltages. Explain how the high voltage reduces power
losses in the transmission lines.

13. A 15-A fuse blows out repeatedly. Why is it dangerous to

replace this fuse with a 25-A fuse?

14. When electric lights are operated on low-frequency ac (say,

5 Hz), they flicker noticeably. Why?

15. Driven  by  ac  power, the  same  electrons  pass  back  and
forth  through  your  reading  lamp  over  and  over  again.
Explain why the light stays lit instead of going out after the
first pass of electrons.

16. The heating element in a toaster is made of Nichrome wire.
Immediately after the toaster is turned on, is the current
magnitude
in the wire increasing, decreasing, or staying
constant? Explain.

AIrmsB

17. Is current used up in a resistor? Explain.
18. Why is it more dangerous to turn on an electric appliance
when you are standing outside in bare feet than when you
are inside wearing shoes with thick soles?

*19. Compare  the  drift  velocities  and  electric  currents  in  two
wires  that  are  geometrically  identical  and  the  density  of
atoms is similar, but the number of free electrons per atom
in the material of one wire is twice that in the other.
*20. A  voltage  V is  connected  across  a  wire  of  length  and
radius r. How is the electron drift speed affected if (a)
is
doubled, (b) r is  doubled, (c) V is  doubled, assuming  in
each case that other quantities stay the same?

l

l

4. Electrons carry energy from a battery to a lightbulb. What
happens to the electrons when they reach the lightbulb?
(a) The electrons are used up.
(b) The electrons stay in the lightbulb.
(c) The electrons are emitted as light.
(d) Fewer electrons leave the bulb than enter it.
(e) None of the above.

5. Where in the circuit of Fig. 18–33
is the current the largest, (a), (b),
(c), or (d)? Or (e) it is the same
at all points?

(c)

(b)

FIGURE 18–33
MisConceptual Question 5.

(a)

+

1.5 V

–

(d)

6. When you double the voltage across a certain material or
device, you observe that the current increases by a factor
of 3. What can you conclude?
(a) Ohm’s law is obeyed, because the current increases

when V increases.

(b) Ohm’s law is not obeyed in this case.
(c) This situation has nothing to do with Ohm’s law.

7. When current flows through a resistor,

(a) some of the charge is used up by the resistor.
(b) some of the current is used up by the resistor.
(c) Both (a) and (b) are true.
(d) Neither (a) nor (b) is true.

8. The unit kilowatt-hour is a measure of

(a) the rate at which energy is transformed.
(b) power.
(c) an amount of energy.
(d) the amount of power used per second.

10. Nothing happens when birds land on a power line, yet we
are warned not to touch a power line with a ladder. What
is the difference?
(a) Birds have extremely high internal resistance

compared to humans.

(b) There is little to no voltage drop between a bird’s two
feet, but there is a significant voltage drop between
the top of a ladder touching a power line and the
bottom of the ladder on the ground.

(c) Dangerous current comes from the ground only.
(d) Most birds don’t understand the situation.

9. Why  might  a  circuit  breaker  open  if  you  plug  too  many

11. When a light switch is turned on, the light comes on imme-

electrical devices into a single circuit?
(a) The voltage becomes too high.
(b) The current becomes too high.
(c) The resistance becomes too high.
(d) A circuit breaker will not “trip” no matter how many

electrical devices you plug into the circuit.

diately because
(a) the electrons coming from the power source move

through the initially empty wires very fast.

(b) the electrons already in the wire are instantly “pushed”

by a voltage difference.

(c) the lightbulb may be old with low resistance. It would

take longer if the bulb were new and had high
resistance.

(d) the electricity bill is paid. The electric company can

make it take longer when the bill is unpaid.

For assigned homework and other learning materials, go to the MasteringPhysics website.

Problems

18–2 and 18–3 Electric Current, Resistance, Ohm’s Law
(Note: The charge on one electron is

1.60 * 10–19 C.
)

1. (I) A  current  of  1.60 A  flows  in  a  wire. How  many  elec-
trons are flowing past any point in the wire per second?
2. (I) A  service  station  charges  a  battery  using  a  current  of
6.7 A for 5.0 h. How much charge passes through the battery?
1200 Na± ions
flow
The  charge  on  the

3. (I) What  is  the  current  in  amperes  if

across  a  cell  membrane  in
sodium is the same as on an electron, but positive.

3.1 ms?

4. (I) What is the resistance of a toaster if 120 V produces a

current of 4.6 A?

5. (I) What voltage will produce 0.25 A of current through a

4800-(cid:3)

resistor?

6. (I) How many coulombs are there in a 75 ampere-hour car

battery?

7. (II)  (a) What  is  the  current  in  the  element  of  an  electric
clothes dryer with a resistance of
when it is connected
to  240 V? (b)  How  much  charge  passes through  the  ele-
ment in 50 min? (Assume direct current.)

8.6 (cid:3)

8. (II) A bird stands on a dc electric transmission line carrying
4100 A (Fig. 18–34). The line has
resistance
per meter, and the bird’s feet are 4.0 cm apart. What is the
potential difference between the bird’s feet?

2.5 * 10–5 (cid:3)

9. (II) A hair dryer draws 13.5 A when plugged into a 120-V
line. (a)  What  is  its  resistance? (b)  How  much  charge
passes through it in 15 min? (Assume direct current.)

10. (II) A 4.5-V battery is connected to a bulb whose resistance
How many electrons leave the battery per minute?

1.3 (cid:3).

is

11. (II)  An  electric  device  draws  5.60 A  at  240 V. (a)  If  the
voltage drops by 15%, what will be the current, assuming
nothing else changes? (b) If the resistance of the device were
reduced by 15%, what current would be drawn at 240 V?

18–4 Resistivity
12. (I)  What  is  the  diameter  of  a  1.00-m  length  of  tungsten
0.32 (cid:3)?

wire whose resistance is

13. (I) What is the resistance of a 5.4-m length of copper wire

1.5 mm in diameter?

14. (II) Calculate the ratio of the resistance of 10.0 m of alu-
minum wire 2.2 mm in diameter, to 24.0 m of copper wire
1.8 mm in diameter.

15. (II)  Can  a  2.2-mm-diameter  copper  wire  have  the  same
resistance as a tungsten wire of the same length? Give numer-
ical details.

16. (II) A  certain  copper  wire  has  a  resistance  of

At
what point along its length must the wire be cut so that the
resistance  of  one  piece  is  4.0 times  the  resistance  of  the
other? What is the resistance of each piece?

15.0 (cid:3).

FIGURE 18–34
Problem 8.

17. (II)  Compute  the  voltage  drop  along  a  21-m  length  of
household no. 14 copper wire (used in 15-A circuits). The
wire has diameter 1.628 mm and carries a 12-A current.

18. (II) Two aluminum wires have the same resistance. If one has
twice the length of the other, what is the ratio of the diameter
of the longer wire to the diameter of the shorter wire?

Problems

521

19. (II) A rectangular solid made of carbon has sides of lengths

1.0 cm, 2.0 cm, and 4.0 cm, lying
along  the  x, y, and  z axes,
respectively  (Fig. 18–35).
Determine the resistance for
current that passes through
the solid in (a) the x direc-
tion, (b)  the  y direction,
and  (c)  the  z direction.
Assume  the  resistivity  is
r = 3.0 * 10–5 (cid:3)(cid:2)m.

y

cm

4.0

FIGURE 18–35
Problem 19.

z

1.0 cm

2.0 cm

x

20. (II) A length of wire is cut in half and the two lengths are
wrapped together side by side to make a thicker wire. How
does the resistance of this new combination compare to the
resistance of the original wire?

21. (II) How much would you have to raise the temperature of
a copper wire (originally at 20°C) to increase its resistance
by 12%?

22. (II)  Determine  at  what  temperature  aluminum  will  have

the same resistivity as tungsten does at 20°C.

23. (II) A 100-W lightbulb has a resistance of about

when
cold (20°C) and
when on (hot). Estimate the tem-
perature  of  the  filament  when  hot  assuming  an  average
temperature coefficient of resistivity

a = 0.0045 (C°)–1.

140 (cid:3)

12 (cid:3)

24. (III) A length of aluminum wire is connected to a precision
10.00-V power supply, and a current of 0.4212 A is precisely
measured at 23.5°C. The wire is placed in a new environment
of  unknown  temperature  where  the  measured  current  is
0.3818 A. What is the unknown temperature?

25. (III) For some applications, it is important that the value
of a resistance not change with temperature. For example,
suppose you made a
resistor from a carbon resistor
and a Nichrome wire-wound resistor connected together so
the total resistance is the sum of their separate resistances.
What value should each of these resistors have (at 0°C) so
that the combination is temperature independent?

3.20-k(cid:3)

26. (III) A 10.0-m length of wire consists of 5.0 m of copper
followed by 5.0 m of aluminum, both of diameter 1.4 mm.
A voltage difference of 95 mV is placed across the composite
wire. (a) What is the total resistance (sum) of the two wires?
(b) What is the current through the wire? (c) What are the
voltages across the aluminum part and across the copper part?

18–5 and 18–6 Electric Power

27. (I) What is the maximum power consumption of a 3.0-V port-
able CD player that draws a maximum of 240 mA of current?

28. (I) The heating element of an electric oven is designed to
produce 3.3 kW of heat when connected to a 240-V source.
What must be the resistance of the element?

a

3.9-k(cid:3)

resistor rated at watt?

29. (I) What is the maximum voltage that can be applied across
1
4
30. (I) (a) Determine the resistance of, and current through,
a 75-W lightbulb connected to its proper source voltage of
110 V. (b) Repeat for a 250-W bulb.

522 CHAPTER 18 Electric Currents

31. (I) An electric car has a battery that can hold 16 kWh of
6 * 107 J
energy (approximately
). If the battery is designed
to operate at 340 V, how many coulombs of charge would
need to leave the battery at 340 V and return at 0 V to equal
the stored energy of the battery?

32. (I) An electric car uses a 45-kW (160-hp) motor. If the bat-
tery pack is designed for 340 V, what current would the motor
need to draw from the battery? Neglect any energy losses
in getting energy from the battery to the motor.

33. (II) A 120-V hair dryer has two settings: 950 W and 1450 W.
(a) At which setting do you guess the resistance to be higher?
After making a guess, determine the resistance at (b) the
lower setting, and (c) the higher setting.

34. (II) A  12-V  battery  causes  a  current  of  0.60 A  through  a
resistor. (a) What is its resistance, and (b) how many joules
of energy does the battery lose in a minute?

35. (II) A 120-V fish-tank heater is rated at 130 W. Calculate
(a) the current through the heater when it is operating, and
(b) its resistance.

36. (II) You buy a 75-W lightbulb in Europe, where electricity
is delivered at 240 V. If you use the bulb in the United States
at 120 V (assume its resistance does not change), how bright
will  it  be  relative  to  75-W  120-V  bulbs? [Hint: Assume
roughly that brightness is proportional to power consumed.]
37. (II) How many kWh of energy does a 550-W toaster use in
the morning if it is in operation for a total of 5.0 min? At a
cost of
estimate how much this would add
to your monthly electric energy bill if you made toast four
mornings per week.

9.0 cents(cid:2)kWh,

38. (II)  At

$0.095(cid:2)kWh,

what  does  it  cost  to  leave  a  25-W

porch light on day and night for a year?

39. (II) What is the total amount of energy stored in a 12-V,

65 A(cid:2) h

car battery when it is fully charged?

40. (II) An ordinary flashlight uses two D-cell 1.5-V batteries
connected in series to provide 3.0 V across the bulb, as in
Fig. 18–4b (Fig. 18–36). The bulb draws 380 mA when turned
on. (a) Calculate the resistance of the bulb and the power dis-
sipated. (b) By what factor would the power increase if four
D-cells in series (total 6.0 V) were used with the same bulb?
(Neglect heating effects of the filament.) Why shouldn’t you
try this?

FIGURE 18–36
Problem 40
(X-ray of a
flashlight).

41. (II) How many 75-W lightbulbs, connected to 120 V as in
Fig. 18–20, can be used without blowing a 15-A fuse?
42. (II)  An  extension  cord  made  of  two  wires  of  diameter
0.129 cm (no. 16 copper wire) and of length 2.7 m (9 ft) is
connected to an electric heater which draws 18.0 A on a
120-V line. How much power is dissipated in the cord?
43. (II) You want to design a portable electric blanket that runs
on a 1.5-V battery. If you use a 0.50-mm-diameter copper
wire as the heating element, how long should the wire be if
you want to generate 18 W of heating power? What happens
if you accidentally connect the blanket to a 9.0-V battery?

44. (II) A power station delivers 750 kW of power at 12,000 V
to a factory through wires with total resistance
How
much less power is wasted if the electricity is delivered at
50,000 V rather than 12,000 V?

3.0 (cid:3).

45. (III) A small immersion heater can be used in a car to heat a
cup of water for coffee or tea. If the heater can heat 120 mL
of water from 25°C to 95°C in 8.0 min, (a) approximately
how much current does it draw from the car’s 12-V battery,
and (b) what is its resistance? Assume the manufacturer’s
claim of 85% efficiency.

46. (III) The current in an electromagnet connected to a 240-V
line is 21.5 A. At what rate must cooling water pass over
the  coils  for  the  water  temperature  to  rise  no  more  than
6.50 C°?

18–7 Alternating Current

47. (I) Calculate the peak current in a

2.7-k(cid:3)

resistor connected

to a 220-V rms ac source.

49. (II) Estimate the resistance of the

48. (I) An ac voltage, whose peak value is 180 V, is across a

310-(cid:3)
resistor. What are the rms and peak currents in the resistor?
circuits in your
house as seen by the power company, when (a) everything
electrical is unplugged, and (b) two 75-W lightbulbs are on.
50. (II) The peak value of an alternating current in a 1500-W

120 -Vrms

device is 6.4 A. What is the rms voltage across it?

51. (II) An 1800-W arc welder is connected to a

660 -Vrms

ac line.

Calculate (a) the peak voltage and (b) the peak current.
52. (II)  Each  channel  of  a  stereo  receiver  is  capable  of  an
average power output of 100 W into an
loudspeaker
(see  Fig. 18–14). What  are  the  rms  voltage  and  the  rms
current  fed  to  the  speaker  (a)  at  the  maximum  power  of
100 W, and (b) at 1.0 W when the volume is turned down?
53. (II) Determine (a) the maximum instantaneous power dissi-
pated by a 2.2-hp pump connected to a
ac power
source, and (b) the maximum current passing through the pump.

240 -Vrms

8-(cid:3)

54. (II) A  heater  coil  connected  to  a
38 (cid:3).

ac  line  has  a
240 -Vrms
(a) What  is  the  average  power  used?
resistance  of
(b)  What  are  the  maximum  and  minimum  values  of  the
instantaneous power?

*18–8 Microscopic View of Electric Current

*55. (II)  A  0.65-mm-diameter  copper  wire  carries  a  tiny  dc

current of

2.7 mA.

Estimate the electron drift velocity.

*56. (II)  A  4.80-m  length  of  2.0-mm-diameter  wire  carries  a
750-mA dc current when 22.0 mV is applied to its ends. If the
1.7 * 10–5 m(cid:2)s,
determine (a) the resistance R
drift velocity is
r,
of the wire, (b) the resistivity
and (c) the number n of
free electrons per unit volume.

*57. (III) At a point high in the Earth’s atmosphere,

2.4 * 1012(cid:2)m3

He2± ions
are moving due north
2.0 * 106 m(cid:2)s.
con-
– ions
is  moving  due  south  at  a  speed  of
O2
Determine the magnitude and direction of

in a concentration of
at  a  speed  of
centration  of
6.2 * 106 m(cid:2)s.
the net current passing through unit area

7.0 * 1011(cid:2)m3

AA(cid:2)m2B.

Also, a

*18–10 Nerve Conduction

*58. (I) What  is  the  magnitude  of  the  electric  field  across  an
thick if the resting potential

1.0 * 10–8 m

axon membrane
–70 mV?
is

*59. (II) A neuron is stimulated with an electric pulse. The action
potential  is  detected  at  a  point  3.70 cm  down  the  axon
0.0052 s later. When the action potential is detected 7.20 cm
from the point of stimulation, the time required is 0.0063 s.
What is the speed of the electric pulse along the axon? (Why
are two measurements needed instead of only one?)

*60. (III)  During  an  action  potential,

Na± ions

3 * 10–7 mol(cid:2)m2 (cid:2)s.

cell at a rate of about
must be produced by the “active
produce this flow against a
Assume that the axon is 10 cm long and

Na±
±30-mV

move  into  the
How much power
pumping” system to
potential difference?
in diameter.

20 mm

General Problems

61. A person accidentally leaves a car with the lights on. If each
of the two headlights uses 40 W and each of the two taillights
6 W, for a total of 92 W, how long will a fresh 12-V battery
last if it is rated at
Assume the full 12 V appears
across each bulb.

75 A(cid:2)h?

62. A  sequence  of  potential  differences  V is  applied  across
(diameter = 0.32 mm,  length = 11 cm)
and  the

a  wire
resulting currents I are measured as follows:

V (V)
I (mA)

0.100
72

0.200
142

0.300
218

0.400
290

0.500
357

(a) If this wire obeys Ohm’s law, graphing I vs. V will result
in a straight-line plot. Explain why this is so and determine
the theoretical predictions for the straight line’s slope and
y-intercept. (b)  Plot  I vs. V. Based  on  this  plot, can  you
conclude  that  the  wire  obeys  Ohm’s  law  (i.e., did  you
obtain a straight line with the expected y-intercept, within
the values of the significant figures)? If so, determine the
wire’s resistance R. (c) Calculate the wire’s resistivity and
use Table 18–1 to identify the solid material from which it
is composed.

63. What is the average current drawn by a 1.0-hp 120-V motor?

(1 hp = 746 W.)

64. The conductance G of an object is defined as the reciprocal
The  unit  of  con-
of  the  resistance  R; that  is,
ductance  is  a
which  is  also  called  the
siemens (S). What  is  the  conductance  (in  siemens)  of  an
object that draws 440 mA of current at 3.0 V?

mho A =  ohm–1B,

G = 1(cid:2)R.

65. The heating element of a 110-V, 1500-W heater is 3.8 m long.

If it is made of iron, what must its diameter be?
66. (a) A particular household uses a 2.2-kW heater
6.0 h(cid:2)day,

2.0 h(cid:2)day
a  3.0-kW
(“on” time), four  100-W  lightbulbs
and miscel-
electric stove element for a total of
laneous  power  amounting  to
If  electricity
costs $0.115 per kWh, what will be their monthly bill (30 d)?
) must be
(b) How much coal (which produces
burned by a 35%-efficient power plant to provide the yearly
needs of this household?

2.0 kWh(cid:2)day.

7500 kcal(cid:2)kg

1.0 h(cid:2)day,

67. A small city requires about 15 MW of power. Suppose that
instead of using high-voltage lines to supply the power, the
power is delivered at 120 V. Assuming a two-wire line of
0.50-cm-diameter  copper  wire, estimate  the  cost  of  the
energy lost to heat per hour per meter. Assume the cost of
electricity is about 12 cents per kWh.

General Problems

523

68. A 1600-W hair dryer is designed for 117 V. (a) What will be
the percentage change in power output if the voltage drops
to 105 V? Assume no change in resistance. (b) How would
the actual change in resistivity with temperature affect your
answer?

69. The wiring in a house must be thick enough so it does not
become  so  hot  as  to  start  a  fire. What  diameter  must  a
copper wire be if it is to carry a maximum current of 35 A
and produce no more than 1.5 W of heat per meter of length?
70. Determine  the  resistance  of  the  tungsten  filament  in  a
75-W 120-V incandescent lightbulb (a) at its operating tem-
perature of about 2800 K, (b) at room temperature.

71. Suppose a current is given by the equation

I = 1.40 sin 210 t,
where I is  in  amperes  and  t in  seconds. (a)  What  is  the
frequency? (b) What is the rms value of the current? (c) If
this  is  the  current  through  a
resistor, write  the
equation that describes the voltage as a function of time.
72. A microwave oven running at 65% efficiency delivers 950 W
to the interior. Find (a) the power drawn from the source,
and (b) the current drawn. Assume a source voltage of 120 V.
wire is stretched uniformly to 1.50 times its origi-

24.0-(cid:3)

1.00-(cid:3)

73. A

nal length. What is its resistance now?

74. 220 V is applied to two different conductors made of the
same  material. One  conductor  is  twice  as  long  and  twice
the diameter of the second. What is the ratio of the power
transformed in the first relative to the second?

75. An electric power plant can produce electricity at a fixed
power P, but the plant operator is free to choose the volt-
age V at which it is produced. This electricity is carried as an
electric current I through a transmission line (resistance R)
from  the  plant  to  the  user, where  it  provides  the  user
P¿.
with  electric  power
(a)  Show  that  the  reduction  in
¢P = P - P¿
due to transmission losses is given by
power
¢P = P2R(cid:2)V2.
(b) In order to reduce power losses during
transmission, should the operator choose V to be as large
or as small as possible?

76. A 2800-W oven is connected to a 240-V source. (a) What is
the  resistance  of  the  oven? (b)  How  long  will  it  take  to
bring  120 mL  of  15°C  water  to  100°C  assuming  65%
efficiency? (c) How much will this cost at

11 cents(cid:2)kWh?

77. A proposed electric vehicle makes use of storage batteries
as its source of energy. It is powered by 24 batteries, each
95 A(cid:2) h.
Assume that the car is driven on level roads at
12 V,
an average speed of
and the average friction force
is 440 N. Assume 100% efficiency and neglect energy used
for acceleration. No energy is consumed when the vehicle is
stopped, since the engine doesn’t need to idle. (a) Determine
the horsepower required. (b) After approximately how many
kilometers must the batteries be recharged?

45 km(cid:2)h,

78. A

15.2-(cid:3)

resistor is made from a coil of copper wire whose
total mass is 15.5 g. What is the diameter of the wire, and
how long is it?

79. A  fish-tank  heater  is  rated  at  95 W  when  connected  to
120 V. The  heating  element  is  a  coil  of  Nichrome  wire.
When uncoiled, the wire has a total length of 3.5 m. What
is the diameter of the wire?

80. A  100-W, 120-V  lightbulb  has  a  resistance  of

when
cold (20°C) and
when on (hot). Calculate its power
consumption (a) at the instant it is turned on, and (b) after
a few moments when it is hot.

140 (cid:3)

12 (cid:3)

524 CHAPTER 18 Electric Currents

81. In  an  automobile, the  system  voltage  varies  from  about
12 V when the car is off to about 13.8 V when the car is on
and  the  charging  system  is  in  operation, a  difference  of
15%. By what percentage does the power delivered to the
headlights vary as the voltage changes from 12 V to 13.8 V?
Assume the headlight resistance remains constant.

1.5 (cid:3),

82. A  tungsten  filament  used  in  a  flashlight  bulb  operates  at
what is
0.20 A and 3.0 V. If its resistance at 20°C is
the temperature of the filament when the flashlight is on?
83. Lightbulb A is rated at 120 V and 40 W for household appli-
cations. Lightbulb B is rated at 12 V and 40 W for automotive
applications. (a) What  is  the  current  through  each  bulb?
(b) What is the resistance of each bulb? (c) In one hour,
how  much  charge  passes  through  each  bulb? (d)  In  one
hour, how much energy does each bulb use? (e) Which bulb
requires larger diameter wires to connect its power source
and the bulb?

84. An air conditioner draws 18 A at 220-V ac. The connecting
cord is copper wire with a diameter of 1.628 mm. (a) How
much power does the air conditioner draw? (b) If the length
of the cord (containing two wires) is 3.5 m, how much power is
dissipated in the wiring? (c) If no. 12 wire, with a diameter
of 2.053 mm, was used instead, how much power would be
dissipated in the wiring? (d) Assuming that the air condi-
tioner  is  run  12 h  per  day, how  much  money  per  month
(30 days)  would  be  saved  by  using  no. 12  wire? Assume
that the cost of electricity is 12 cents per kWh.

85. An electric wheelchair is designed to run on a single 12-V
battery  rated  to  provide  100 ampere-hours  (100
).
(a) How much energy is stored in this battery? (b) If the
wheelchair  experiences  an  average  total  retarding  force
(mainly friction) of 210 N, how far can the wheelchair travel
on one charge?

A(cid:2) h

86. If a wire of resistance R is stretched uniformly so that its
length doubles, by what factor does the power dissipated
in the wire change, assuming it remains hooked up to the
same voltage source? Assume the wire’s volume and density
remain constant.

87. Copper wire of diameter 0.259 cm is used to connect a set
of appliances at 120 V, which draw 1450 W of power total.
(a) What power is wasted in 25.0 m of this wire? (b) What
is your answer if wire of diameter 0.412 cm is used?

88. Battery-powered  electricity  is  very  expensive  compared
with  that  available  from  a  wall  receptacle. Estimate  the
cost  per  kWh  of  (a)  an  alkaline  D-cell  (cost  $1.70)  and
(b)  an  alkaline AA-cell  (cost  $1.25). These  batteries  can
provide a continuous current of 25 mA for 820 h and 120 h,
respectively, at 1.5 V. (c) Compare to the cost of a normal
120-V ac house source at

$0.10(cid:2)kWh.

89. A  copper  pipe  has  an  inside  diameter  of  3.00 cm  and  an

outside  diameter  of  5.00 cm  (Fig. 18–37).
What  is  the  resis-
tance of a 10.0-m
length  of  this
pipe?

3.00 cm

5.00 cm

FIGURE 18–37
Problem 89.

*90. The Tevatron accelerator at Fermilab (Illinois) is designed
(q = 1.6 * 10–19 C)
to  carry  an  11-mA  beam  of  protons
A3.0 * 108 m(cid:2)sB
traveling at very nearly the speed of light
around a ring 6300 m in circumference. How many protons
are in the beam?

*91. The level of liquid helium (temperature

L 4 K

l

) in its storage
tank can be monitored using a vertically aligned niobium–
titanium  (NbTi)  wire, whose  length
spans  the  height  of
the  tank. In  this  level-sensing  setup, an  electronic  circuit
maintains a constant electrical current I at all times in the
NbTi  wire  and  a  voltmeter  monitors  the  voltage  differ-
ence V across this wire. Since the superconducting critical
temperature  for  NbTi  is  10 K, the  portion  of  the  wire
immersed  in  the  liquid  helium  is  in  the  superconducting
state, while the portion above the liquid (in helium vapor
with temperature above 10 K) is in the normal state. Define
f = x(cid:2)l
to  be  the  fraction  of  the  tank  filled  with  liquid
helium (Fig. 18–38) and
V
to be the value of V when the
0
(f = 0).
Determine  the  relation  between
tank  is  empty
).V
f and V (in terms of
0

Search and Learn

1. Why is Ohm’s law less of a law than Newton’s laws?
2. A traditional incandescent lamp filament may have been lit
to  a  temperature  of  2700 K. A  contemporary  halogen
incandescent  lamp  filament  may  be  at  around  2900 K.
(a) Estimate the percent improvement of the halogen bulb
over the traditional one. [Hint: See Section 14–8.] (b) To
produce the same amount of light as a traditional 100-W
bulb, estimate what wattage a halogen bulb should use.
3. You find a small cylindrical resistor that measures 9.00 mm
in length and 2.15 mm in diameter, and it has a color code
of red, yellow, brown, and gold. What is the resistor made
of primarily?

A

0 ,

l
0 ,

¢l,

¢R

cross-sectional  area

4. Small changes in the length of an object can be measured
using  a  strain  gauge sensor, which  is  a  wire  that  when
undeformed  has  length
and
R
resistance
This sensor is rigidly affixed to the object’s
0 .
surface, aligning its length in the direction in which length
changes  are  to  be  measured. As  the  object  deforms, the
and the resulting
length of the wire sensor changes by
in the sensor’s resistance is measured. Assuming
change
that as the solid wire is deformed to a length
its density
and  volume  remain  constant  (only  approximately valid),
of  the  wire  sensor, and
show  that  the  strain
thus of the object to which it is attached, is approximately
¢R(cid:2)2R

[See Sections 18–4 and 9–5.]
5. An electric heater is used to heat a room of volume

65 m3.
Air  is  brought  into  the  room  at  5°C  and  is  completely
replaced twice per hour. Heat loss through the walls amounts
to approximately
If the air is to be maintained
at 22°C, what  minimum  wattage  must  the  heater  have?
(The specific heat of air is about
Reread
parts of Chapter 14 and Section 18–5.)

0.17 kcal(cid:2)kg (cid:2)C°.

850 kcal(cid:2)h.

A=  ¢l(cid:2)l
0

0 .

l,

B

V

Constant I

Helium
vapor
((cid:4)10 K)

l

Liquid
helium
(    4 K)

x

l
a
m
r
o
N

g
n
i
t
c
u
d
n
o
c
r
e
p
u
S

I

FIGURE 18–38 Problem 91.

6. Household wiring has sometimes used aluminium instead of
copper. (a) Using Table 18–1, find the ratio of the resistance
of a copper wire to that of an aluminum wire of the same
length and diameter. (b) Typical copper wire used for home
wiring in the U.S. has a diameter of 1.63 mm. What is the
resistance  of  125 m  of  this  wire? (c) What  would  be  the
resistance of the same wire if it were made of aluminum?
(d) How much power would be dissipated in each wire if it
carried 18 A of current? (e) What should be the diameter
of  the  aluminum  wire  for  it  to  have  the  same  resistance
as  the  copper  wire? (f )  In  Section  18–4, a  statement  is
made  about  the  resistance  of  copper  and  aluminum  wires
of the same weight. Using Table 10–1 for the densities of
copper and aluminum, find the resistance of an aluminum
wire  of  the  same  mass  and  length  as  the  copper  wire  in
part (b). Is the statement true?

*7. How far can an average electron move along the wires of a
650-W  toaster  during  an  alternating  current  cycle? The
power  cord  has  copper  wires  of  diameter  1.7 mm  and  is
plugged into a standard 60-Hz 120-V ac outlet. [Hint: The
maximum current in the cycle is related to the maximum
drift  velocity. The  maximum  velocity  in  an  oscillation  is
related to the maximum displacement; see Chapter 11.]

*8. Capacitance of an axon. (a) Do an order-of-magnitude esti-
mate for the capacitance of an axon 10 cm long of radius
10–8 m,
10 mm.
The  thickness  of  the  membrane  is  about
and the dielectric constant is about 3. (b) By what factor
Na±
does the concentration (number of ions per volume) of
ions in the cell change as a result of one action potential?

A N S W E R S   T O   E X E R C I S E S

1.6 * 10–13 A.

A:
B: 3600 C.
240 (cid:3).
C:
D: (b), (c).
E: (c).

F: 110 m.
G: (d).
H: 370,000 kg, or about 5000 people.
I:

(e) 40.

Search and Learn 525
