We are used to voltage in our
lives—a 12-volt car battery, 110 V
or 220 V at home, 1.5-volt flashlight
batteries, and so on. Here we see
displayed the voltage produced
across a human heart, known as an
electrocardiogram. Voltage is the
same as electric potential difference
between two points. Electric
potential is defined as the potential
energy per unit charge.

We discuss voltage and its
relation to electric field, as well as
electric energy storage, capacitors,
and applications including the ECG
shown here, binary numbers and
digital electronics, TV and computer
monitors, and digital TV.

E

R

A P T

H

C

17

CONTENTS

17–1 Electric Potential Energy and
Potential Difference
17–2 Relation between Electric
Potential and Electric Field

17–3 Equipotential Lines and

Surfaces

17–4 The Electron Volt, a Unit

of Energy

17–5 Electric Potential Due to

Point Charges
*17–6 Potential Due to Electric
Dipole; Dipole Moment

17–7 Capacitance
17–8 Dielectrics
17–9 Storage of Electric Energy
17–10 Digital; Binary Numbers;

Signal Voltage

*17–11 TV and Computer Monitors:
CRTs, Flat Screens
*17–12 Electrocardiogram

(ECG or EKG)

473

Electric Potential

CHAPTER-OPENING QUESTION—Guess now!
When two positively charged small spheres are pushed toward each other, what
happens to their potential energy?

(a) It remains unchanged.
(b) It decreases.
(c) It increases.
(d) There is no potential energy in this situation.

W e saw in Chapter 6 that the concept of energy was extremely valuable

in  dealing  with  the  subject  of  mechanics. For  one  thing, energy  is  a
conserved  quantity  and  is  thus  an  important  tool  for  understanding
nature. Furthermore, we  saw  that  many  Problems  could  be  solved  using  the
energy concept even though a detailed knowledge of the forces involved was not
possible, or  when  a  calculation  involving  Newton’s  laws  would  have  been  too
difficult.

The energy point of view can be used in electricity, and it is especially useful.
It not only extends the law of conservation of energy, but it gives us another way
to view electrical phenomena. The energy concept is also a tool in solving Problems
more easily in many cases than by using forces and electric fields.

High PE

High
potential

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

B
E

(cid:2)

a

(cid:2)

b

−−

−−

−−

−−

−−

−−

−−

−−

−−

−−

−−

−−

−−

−−

−−

−−

Low PE

Low
potential

d
FIGURE 17–1 Work is done by the
electric field
positive charge from position a to
position b.

in moving the

B
E

17–1 Electric Potential Energy and
Potential Difference

Electric Potential Energy
To apply conservation of energy, we need to define electric potential energy as we
did for other types of potential energy. As we saw in Chapter 6, potential energy
can be defined only for a conservative force. The work done by a conservative
force in moving an object between any two positions is independent of the path
(cid:2)r2
taken. The electrostatic force between any two charges (Eq. 16–1,
)
is conservative because the dependence on position is just like the gravitational
force (Eq. 5–4), which is conservative. Hence we can define potential energy PE
for the electrostatic force.

F = kQ1

Q

2

We saw in Chapter 6 that the change in potential energy between any two
points, a and b, equals the negative of the work done by the conservative force on
an object as it moves from point a to point b:

¢pe = –W.

peb - pea ,

Thus  we  define  the  change  in  electric  potential  energy,

when  a
point charge q moves from some point a to another point b, as the negative of the
work done by the electric force on the charge as it moves from point a to point b.
For example, consider the electric field between two equally but oppositely charged
parallel plates; we assume their separation is small compared to their width and
height, so the field  will be uniform over most of the region, Fig. 17–1. Now con-
sider a tiny positive point charge q placed at the point “a” very near the positive
If this charge q at
plate as shown. This charge q is so small that it has no effect on
point a is released, the electric force will do work on the charge and accelerate it
toward the negative plate. The work W done by the electric field E to move the
charge a distance d is (using Eq. 16–5,

F = qE

B
.
E

B
E

)

W = Fd = qEd
.

B
]
[uniform E

The change in electric potential energy equals the negative of the work done by
the electric force:

peb - pea = –qEd

B
]
[uniform E

(17;1)

B
.
E

for  this  case  of  uniform  electric  field
In  the  case  illustrated, the  potential
¢pe
energy decreases (
is negative); and as the charged particle accelerates from
point a to point b in Fig. 17–1, the particle’s kinetic energy KE increases—by an
equal amount. In accord with the conservation of energy, electric potential energy
is transformed into kinetic energy, and the total energy is conserved. Note that
the positive charge q has its greatest potential energy at point a, near the positive
plate.† The reverse is true for a negative charge: its potential energy is greatest
near the negative plate.

Electric Potential and Potential Difference
In Chapter 16, we found it useful to define the electric field as the force per unit
charge. Similarly, it  is  useful  to  define  the  electric  potential (or  simply  the
potential when “electric” is understood) as the electric potential energy per unit
charge. Electric potential is given the symbol V. If a positive test charge q in an
at some point a (relative to some
electric field has electric potential energy
at this point is
zero potential energy), the electric potential

pea
Va

Va =

pea
q

.

(17;2a)

As we discussed in Chapter 6, only differences in potential energy are physically
meaningful. Hence only the difference in potential, or the potential difference,
between  two  points  a  and  b  (such  as  those  shown  in  Fig. 17–1)  is  measurable.

†At point a, the positive charge q has its greatest ability to do work (on some other object or system).

474 CHAPTER 17 Electric Potential

When the electric force does positive work on a charge, the kinetic energy increases
peb - pea ,
and the potential energy decreases. The difference in potential energy,
is equal to the negative of the work,
done by the electric field to move the
charge from a to b; so the potential difference

Wba ,

Vba

is

Vba = Vb - Va =

peb - pea
q

= –

Wba
q

.

(17;2b)

Note that electric potential, like electric field, does not depend on our test charge q.
V depends on the other charges that create the field, not on the test charge q;
q acquires potential energy by being in the potential V due to the other charges.
We can see from our definition that the positive plate in Fig. 17–1 is at a higher
potential than the negative plate. Thus a positively charged object moves naturally
from a high potential to a low potential. A negative charge does the reverse.

The unit of electric potential, and of potential difference, is joules/coulomb
and is given a special name, the volt, in honor of Alessandro Volta (1745–1827)
who is best known for inventing the electric battery. The volt is abbreviated V,
so
Potential difference, since it is measured in volts, is often referred
to as voltage. (Be careful not to confuse V for volts, with italic V for voltage.)

1 V = 1 J(cid:2)C.

If we wish to speak of the potential
Va

Va
at some point a, we must be aware
depends on where the potential is chosen to be zero. The zero for electric
that
potential in a given situation can be chosen arbitrarily, just as for potential energy,
because only differences in potential energy can be measured. Often the ground,
or  a  conductor  connected  directly  to  the  ground  (the  Earth), is  taken  as  zero
potential, and other potentials are given with respect to ground. (Thus, a point
where the voltage is 50 V is one where the difference of potential between it and
ground is 50 V.) In other cases, as we shall see, we may choose the potential to be
zero at an infinite distance.

CONCEPTUAL EXAMPLE 17;1
A negative charge. Suppose a negative
charge, such as an electron, is placed near the negative plate in Fig. 17–1, at
point b, shown here in Fig. 17–2. If the electron is free to move, will its electric
potential energy increase or decrease? How will the electric potential change?

RESPONSE An electron released at point b will be attracted to the positive plate.
As the electron accelerates toward the positive plate, its kinetic energy increases,
pea 6 peb
so  its  potential  energy  decreases:
But
note that the electron moves from point b at low potential to point a at higher
Vb
are due to the charges on
potential:
¢pe
the  plates, not  due  to  the  electron.)  The  signs  of
are  opposite
because of the negative charge of the electron.
NOTE A positive charge placed next to the negative plate at b would stay there,
with no acceleration. A positive charge tends to move from high potential to low.

¢pe = pea - peb 6 0.

¢V = Va - Vb 7 0.

(Potentials

and

and

and

¢V

Va

High
potential
Va

B
E

+

+

+

a

+

+

−−

−−

−−

−−

−−

(cid:3)
b

Low
potential
Vb

High PE
for negative
charge here

FIGURE 17–2 Central part of
Fig. 17–1, showing a negative point
charge near the negative plate.
Example 17–1.

C A U T I O N
A negative charge has high PE
when potential V is low

Because  the  electric  potential  difference  is  defined  as  the  potential  energy
difference  per  unit  charge, then  the  change  in  potential  energy  of  a  charge  q
when it moves from point a to point b is

¢pe = peb - pea = qAVb - VaB = qVba .

(17;3)

Vba ,

qVba .

its
That is, if an object with charge q moves through a potential difference
For example, if the potential dif-
potential energy changes by an amount
±1 C
ference  between  the  two  plates  in  Fig. 17–1  is  6 V, then  a
charge  moved
from  point  b  to  point  a  will  gain
of  electric  potential  energy.
(And it will lose 6 J of electric potential energy if it moves from a to b.) Similarly,
, and so on. Thus, electric potential
a
difference is a measure of how much energy an electric charge can acquire in a
given situation. And, since energy is the ability to do work, the electric potential
difference is also a measure of how much work a given charge can do. The exact
amount of energy or work depends both on the potential difference and on the charge.

¢pe = (2 C)(6 V) = 12 J

(1 C)(6 V) = 6 J

charge will gain

±2 C

SECTION 17–1 Electric Potential Energy and Potential Difference 475

+
Va
+

Vba

Q

+

2Q

+

+

(b)

−
Vb
−

−

−

−

h

(a)

FIGURE 17–3 (a) Two rocks are at
the same height. The larger rock has
more potential energy. (b) Two
positive charges have the same
electric potential. The 2Q charge has
more potential energy.

TABLE 17–1 Some Typical
Potential Differences (Voltages)

Source

Thundercloud to ground
High-voltage power line
Automobile ignition
Household outlet
Automobile battery
Flashlight battery
(AA, AAA, C, D)
Resting potential across
nerve membrane
Potential changes on skin
(ECG and EEG)

Voltage
(approx.)

108 V
105–106 V
104 V
102 V
12 V

1.5 V

10–1 V

10–4 V

FIGURE 17–4 Electron accelerated,
Example 17–2.

e −

(cid:2)

−

−

−

−

−

−

−

−

a

(cid:2)
Vba
5000 V

High
voltage

+

+

+

+

+

+

+
+

b

To better understand electric potential, let’s make a comparison to the gravi-
tational case when a rock falls from the top of a cliff. The greater the height, h,
(= mgh)
of a cliff, the more potential energy
the rock has at the top of the cliff
relative to the bottom, and the more kinetic energy it will have when it reaches
the bottom. The actual amount of kinetic energy it will acquire, and the amount
of work it can do, depends both on the height of the cliff and the mass m of the
rock. A large rock and a small rock can be at the same height h (Fig. 17–3a) and
thus have the same “gravitational potential,” but the larger rock has the greater
potential energy (it has more mass). The electrical case is similar (Fig. 17–3b):
the potential energy change, or the work that can be done, depends both on the
potential difference (corresponding to the height of the cliff) and on the charge
(corresponding  to  mass), Eq. 17–3. But  note  a  significant  difference: electric
charge comes in two types,

and  whereas gravitational mass is always

–,

±.

±

Sources of electrical energy such as batteries and electric generators are meant
to maintain a potential difference. The actual amount of energy transformed by
such a device depends on how much charge flows, as well as the potential dif-
ference  (Eq. 17–3). For  example, consider  an  automobile  headlight  connected
to a 12.0-V battery. The amount of energy transformed (into light and thermal
energy) is proportional to how much charge flows, which in turn depends on how
long the light is on. If over a given period of time 5.0 C of charge flows through
the light, the total energy transformed is
If the headlight
is left on twice as long, 10.0 C of charge will flow and the energy transformed is
(10.0 C)(12.0 V) = 120 J.

Table 17–1 presents some typical voltages.

(5.0 C)(12.0 V) = 60 J.

Vb - Va = Vba = ±5000 V

EXAMPLE 17;2
Electron in TV tube. Suppose an electron is accelerated
(Fig. 17–4).
from rest through a potential difference
(a) What is the change in electric potential energy of the electron? What is
Am = 9.1 * 10–31 kgB
(b) the kinetic energy, and (c) the speed of the electron
as a result of this acceleration?
APPROACH The electron, accelerated toward the positive plate, will change in
¢pe = qVba
(Eq. 17–3). The  loss  in  potential
potential  energy  by  an  amount
energy will equal its gain in kinetic energy (energy conservation).
SOLUTION (a) The  charge  on  an  electron  is
Therefore its change in potential energy is

q = –e = –1.6 * 10–19 C.

¢pe = qVba = A –1.6 * 10–19 CB(±5000 V) = –8.0 * 10–16 J.
The  minus  sign  indicates  that  the  potential  energy  decreases. The  potential
Vba ,
difference,
is higher than the
initial potential
Negative electrons are attracted toward a positive electrode
(or plate) and repelled away from a negative electrode.
(b) The potential energy lost by the electron becomes kinetic energy KE. From
conservation of energy (Eq. 6–11a),

has a positive sign because the final potential
Va .

¢ke + ¢pe = 0,

Vb

so

¢ke = – ¢pe

1

2 mv2 - 0 = –qAVb - VaB = –qVba ,

where  the  initial  kinetic  energy  is  zero  since  we  are  given  that  the  electron
started from rest. So the final
(c) In the equation just above we solve for v:

ke = –qVba = 8.0 * 10–16 J.

v =

–

B

2qVba
m

=

–

C

2A –1.6 * 10–19 CB(5000 V)
9.1 * 10–31 kg

= 4.2 * 107 m(cid:2)s.

NOTE The electric potential energy does not depend on the mass, only on the
charge and voltage. The speed does depend on m.

EXERCISE A Instead  of  the  electron
Am = 1.67 * 10–27 kgB
What would be the proton’s (a) change in PE, and (b) final speed?

was accelerated from rest by a potential difference

in  Example  17–2,

suppose  a  proton
Vba = –5000 V.

476 CHAPTER 17 Electric Potential

17–2 Relation between Electric Potential

and Electric Field

The effects of any charge distribution can be described either in terms of electric field
or in terms of electric potential. Electric potential is often easier to use because it is
a scalar, whereas electric field is a vector. There is an intimate connection between
the potential and the field. Let us consider the case of a uniform electric field, such as
Vba .
that between the parallel plates of Fig. 17–1 whose difference of potential is
The work done by the electric field to move a positive charge q from point a to
point b is equal to the negative of the change in potential energy (Eq. 17–2b), so

W = –qAVb - VaB = –qVba .

We can also write the work done as the force times distance, where the force on q is
F = qE,

so

W = Fd = qEd,

where d is the distance (parallel to the field lines) between points a and b. We
now set these two expressions for W equal and find

qVba = –qEd,

Vba = –Ed.

If we solve for E, we find
Vba
d

E = –

.

or
B
E
]

[uniform

(17;4a)

[uniform

B
E
]

(17;4b)

From  Eq. 17–4b  we  see  that  the  units  for  electric  field  can  be  written  as  volts
). These
per meter
are equivalent because
The minus
sign in Eq. 17–4b tells us that  points in the direction of decreasing potential V.

1 N(cid:2)C = 1 N(cid:2)m(cid:2)C(cid:2)m = 1 J(cid:2)C(cid:2)m = 1 V(cid:2)m.

, as well as newtons per coulomb (

E = F(cid:2)q

(V(cid:2)m)

, from

N(cid:2)C

B
E

EXAMPLE 17;3
Electric field obtained from voltage. Two parallel plates
are charged to produce a potential difference of 50 V. If the separation between
the plates is 0.050 m, calculate the magnitude of the electric field in the space
between the plates (Fig. 17–5).
APPROACH We apply Eq. 17–4b to obtain the magnitude of E, assumed uniform.
SOLUTION The magnitude of the electric field is

E = Vba(cid:2)d = (50 V(cid:2)0.050 m) = 1000 V(cid:2)m.

NOTE Equations 17–4 apply only for a uniform electric field. The general rela-
tionship between  and V is more complicated.

B
E

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

−

−

−

−

−

−

−

−

−

−

Vba
(cid:3) 50 V

E = ?

d =
5.0 cm

FIGURE 17–5 Example 17–3.

*

B
E

B
E

General Relation between  and V
In a region where
and V takes on a
is not uniform, the connection between
different form than Eqs. 17–4. In general, it is possible to show that the electric field
in a given direction at any point in space is equal to the rate at which the electric
potential decreases over distance in that direction. For example, the x component
= – ¢V(cid:2)¢x,
of the electric field is given by
is the change in poten-
tial over a very short distance

E
x
¢x.

where

¢V

B
E

Breakdown Voltage
When very high voltages are present, air can become ionized due to the high electric
fields. Any  odd  free  electron  can  be  accelerated  to  sufficient  kinetic  energy  to
and  molecules of the air. This breakdown of air occurs
knock electrons out of
When electrons recombine with
when the electric field exceeds about
their molecules, light is emitted. Such breakdown of air is the source of lightning,
the spark of a car’s spark plug, and even short sparks between your fingers and a
doorknob after you walk across a synthetic rug or slide across a car seat (which can
result in a significant transfer of charge to you).

3 * 106 V(cid:2)m.

O2

N2

SECTION 17–2 Relation between Electric Potential and Electric Field 477

B
E

−

−

−

−

−

−

−

−

−

−

−

−

−

−

−

−

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

20 V

15 V

10 V

0 V

5 V

FIGURE 17–6 Equipotential lines
(the green dashed lines) between
two charged parallel plates are
always perpendicular to the electric
field (solid red lines).

FIGURE 17–7 Equipotential lines
(green, dashed) are always
perpendicular to the electric field
lines (solid red), shown here for two
equal but oppositely charged
particles (an “electric dipole”).

+

–

17–3 Equipotential Lines and Surfaces

B
E

B
;
E

The electric potential can be represented by drawing equipotential lines or, in three
dimensions, equipotential surfaces. An equipotential surface is one on which all points
are at the same potential. That is, the potential difference between any two points
on the surface is zero, so no work is required to move a charge from one point on the
surface to the other. An equipotential surface must be perpendicular to the electric field
at any point. If this were not so—that is, if there were a component of  parallel to
the surface—it would require work to move the charge along the surface against this
and this would contradict the idea that it is an equipotential surface.
component of
The fact that the electric field lines and equipotential surfaces are mutually
perpendicular helps us locate the equipotentials when the electric field lines are
known. In a normal two-dimensional drawing, we show equipotential lines, which
are the intersections of equipotential surfaces with the plane of the drawing. In
Fig. 17–6, a few of the equipotential lines are drawn (dashed green lines) for the
electric field (red lines) between two parallel plates at a potential difference of
20 V. The negative plate is arbitrarily chosen to be zero volts and the potential of
each equipotential line is indicated. Note that  points toward lower values of V.
The equipotential lines for the case of two equal but oppositely charged particles
–
are shown in Fig. 17–7 as green dashed lines. (This combination of equal
charges is called an “electric dipole,” as we saw in Section 16–8; see Fig. 16–32a.)
Unlike electric field lines, which start and end on electric charges, equipotential
lines and surfaces are always continuous and never end, and so continue beyond
the borders of Figs. 17–6 and 17–7. A useful analogy for equipotential lines is a
topographic map: the contour lines are gravitational equipotential lines (Fig. 17–8).
We saw in Section 16–9 that there can be no electric field within a conductor in the
static case, for otherwise the free electrons would feel a force and would move. Indeed
the entire volume of a conductor must be entirely at the same potential in the static case.
The surface of a conductor is thus an equipotential surface. (If it weren’t, the free
electrons at the surface would move, because whenever there is a potential difference
between two points, free charges will move.) This is fully consistent with our result in
Section 16–9 that the electric field at the surface of a conductor must be perpendicular
to the surface.

and

B
E

±

FIGURE 17–8 A topographic map (here,
a portion of the Sierra Nevada in California)
shows continuous contour lines, each of which
is at a fixed height above sea level. Here they
are at 80-ft (25-m) intervals. If you walk along
one contour line, you neither climb nor
descend. If you cross lines, and especially if you
climb perpendicular to the lines, you will be
changing your gravitational potential (rapidly,
if the lines are close together).

17–4 The Electron Volt, a Unit of Energy

The joule is a very large unit for dealing with energies of electrons, atoms, or molecules.
For this purpose, the unit electron volt (eV) is used. One electron volt is defined as
the energy acquired by a particle carrying a charge whose magnitude equals that
(q = e)
as a result of moving through a potential difference of 1 V.
on the electron
The charge on an electron has magnitude
and the change in potential
A1.6022 * 10–19 CB(1.00 V) = 1.6022 * 10–19 J:
energy equals qV. So 1 eV is equal to

1.6022 * 10–19 C,

Electron volt

1 eV = 1.6022 * 10–19 L  1.60 * 10–19 J.

An electron that accelerates through a potential difference of 1000 V will lose 1000 eV
of potential energy and thus gain 1000 eV or 1 keV (kiloelectron volt) of kinetic energy.

478 CHAPTER 17

On the other hand, if a particle with a charge equal to twice the magnitude of the
charge on the electron
moves through a potential differ-
ence of 1000 V, its kinetic energy will increase by

A=  2e = 3.2 * 10–19 CB

2000 eV = 2 keV.

Although the electron volt is handy for stating the energies of molecules and
elementary particles, it is not a proper SI unit. For calculations, electron volts should
be converted to joules using the conversion factor just given. In Example 17–2, for
example, the electron acquired a kinetic energy of
We can quote
but when determining
this energy as 5000 eV
the speed of a particle in SI units, we must use the KE in joules (J).

A=  8.0 * 10–16 J(cid:2)1.6 * 10–19 J(cid:2)eVB,

8.0 * 10–16 J.

EXERCISE B What is the kinetic energy of a
through  a  potential  difference  of  2.5 kV? (a)  2500 eV,
(d) 10,000 eV, (e) 250 eV.

He2±

ion released from rest and accelerated
(c)  5000 eV,

(b)  500 eV,

17–5 Electric Potential Due to

Point Charges

The electric potential at a distance r from a single point charge Q can be derived
from the expression for its electric field (Eq. 16–4,
) using calculus.
, which
The  potential  in  this  case  is  usually  taken  to  be  zero  at  infinity  (
means  extremely, indefinitely, far  away); this  is  also  where  the  electric  field
AE = kQ(cid:2)r2B

is zero. The result is

E = kQ(cid:2)r2

= q

V = k

Q
r

=

1
4p(cid:4)

0

Q
r

,

c single point charge
V = 0 at r = q

d

(17;5)

at

q

r = q;

k = 8.99 * 109 N(cid:2)m2(cid:2)C2 L 9.0 * 109 N(cid:2)m2(cid:2)C2.

where
We can think of V here
as representing the absolute potential at a distance r from the charge Q, where
V = 0
or we can think of V as the potential difference between r and
infinity. (The symbol  means infinitely far away.)  Notice that the potential V
decreases with the first power of the distance, whereas the electric field (Eq. 16–4)
decreases as the square of the distance. The potential near a positive charge is large
and positive, and it decreases toward zero at very large distances, Fig. 17–9a. The
potential near a negative charge is negative and increases toward zero at large
distances, Fig. 17–9b. Equation 17–5 is sometimes called the Coulomb potential
(it has its origin in Coulomb’s law).

point charge.

Potential due to a positive or a negative charge. Deter-
±20 mC
point charge, (b) from a

EXAMPLE 17;4
mine the potential at a point 0.50 m (a) from a
–20 mC
APPROACH The potential due to a point charge is given by Eq. 17–5,
SOLUTION (a) At a distance of 0.50 m from a positive
is

V = kQ(cid:2)r.
charge, the potential

20 mC

V = k

Q
r

= A9.0 * 109 N(cid:2)m2(cid:2)C2B ¢ 20 * 10–6 C

0.50 m

≤ = 3.6 * 105 V.

(b) For the negative charge,

V = A9.0 * 109 N(cid:2)m2(cid:2)C2B ¢

–20 * 10–6 C
0.50 m

≤ = –3.6 * 105 V.

C A U T I O N
V r 1

r , E r 1

r2

for a point charge

FIGURE 17–9 Potential V as a
function of distance r from a single
point charge Q when the charge is
(a) positive, (b) negative.

V

0

V

0

V = k

Q
r

when Q > 0

(a)

r

r

V = k

Q
r

when Q < 0

(b)

P R O B L E M   S O L V I N G

NOTE Potential can be positive or negative, and we always include a charge’s
sign when we find electric potential.

Keep track of charge signs
for electric potential

SECTION 17–5 Electric Potential Due to Point Charges

479

q = 3.00 mC

Q = 20.0 mC?

from a great distance away (take

EXAMPLE 17;5
Work  required  to  bring  two  positive  charges  close
together. What minimum work must be done by an external force to bring a
) to a point 0.500 m
charge
from a charge
APPROACH To find the work we cannot simply multiply the force times distance
1(cid:2)r2
because the force is proportional to
and so is not constant. Instead we can
set the change in potential energy equal to the (positive of the) work required of an
Wext = ¢pe = qAVb - VaB.
external force (Chapter 6, Eq. 6–7a), and Eq. 17–3:
using Eq. 17–5.
We get the potentials
and
SOLUTION The external work required is equal to the change in potential energy:

r = q

Vb

Va

Wext = qAVb - VaB = q ¢

kQ
rb

-

kQ
ra

≤ ,

where
zero

rb = 0.500 m
so

(1(cid:2)q = 0)

and

ra = q.

The right-hand term within the parentheses is

Wext = A3.00 * 10–6 CB

A8.99 * 109 N(cid:2)m2(cid:2)C2BA2.00 * 10–5 CB
(0.500 m)

= 1.08 J.

NOTE We  could  not  use  Eqs. 17–4  here  because  they  apply  only to  uniform
fields. But we did use Eq. 17–3 because it is always valid.

EXERCISE C What work is required to bring a charge
of 1.50 m from a charge

Q = 20.0 mC

until it is 0.50 m away?

q = 3.00 mC

originally a distance

To  determine  the  electric  field  at  points  near  a  collection  of  two  or  more
point charges requires adding up the electric fields due to each charge. Since the
electric field is a vector, this can be time consuming or complicated. To find the
electric  potential  at  a  point  due  to  a  collection  of  point  charges  is  far  easier,
because the electric potential is a scalar, and hence you only need to add numbers
(with appropriate signs) without concern for direction.

EXAMPLE 17;6
Potential above two charges. Calculate the electric poten-
tial (a) at point A in Fig. 17–10 due to the two charges shown, and (b) at point B.
[This is the same situation as Examples 16–9 and 16–10, Fig. 16–29, where we
calculated the electric field at these points.]
APPROACH The total potential at point A (or at point B) is the algebraic sum
of the potentials at that point due to each of the two charges
The
potential  due  to  each  single  charge  is  given  by  Eq. 17–5. We  do  not  have  to
worry about directions because electric potential is a scalar quantity. But we do
have to keep track of the signs of charges.

and

Q
1

2 .

Q

C A U T I O N
We cannot use

W = Fd
if F is not constant

C A U T I O N
Potential is a scalar and
has no components

y

B

60 cm

A

30 cm

40 cm

Q2

= +50 mC

26 cm

26 cm

x
= −50 mC

Q1

FIGURE 17–10 Example 17–6. (See also
Examples 16–9 and 16–10, Fig. 16–29.)

480 CHAPTER 17 Electric Potential

SOLUTION (a) We add the potentials at point A due to each charge
and we use Eq. 17–5 for each:

Q

1

and

Q

2 ,

+ VA1

VA = VA2
Q
2
r
2A

= k

+ k

1

Q
r
1A

where

1A = 60 cm
r

and

2A = 30 cm.
r

Then

VA =

A9.0 * 109 N(cid:2)m2(cid:2)C2BA5.0 * 10–5 CB
0.30 m

+

A9.0 * 109 N(cid:2)m2(cid:2)C2BA –5.0 * 10–5 CB
0.60 m

= 1.50 * 106 V - 0.75 * 106 V
= 7.5 * 105 V.

(b) At point B,

1B = r
r

2B = 0.40 m,

so

VB = VB2

+ VB1

=

A9.0 * 109 N(cid:2)m2(cid:2)C2BA5.0 * 10–5 CB
0.40 m

+

A9.0 * 109 N(cid:2)m2(cid:2)C2BA –5.0 * 10–5 CB
0.40 m

= 0 V.

Q

and

NOTE The two terms in the sum in (b) cancel for any point equidistant from
Q
Thus the potential will be zero everywhere on the plane
1
equidistant  between  the  two  opposite  charges. This  plane  is  an  equipotential
surface with V = 0.

1B = r
Ar

2BB.

2

Simple  summations  like  these  can  be  performed  for  any  number  of  point

charges.

CONCEPTUAL EXAMPLE 17;7
Potential energies. Consider the three
pairs of charges shown in Fig. 17–11. Call them
(a) Which set has a
2 .
positive potential energy? (b) Which set has the most negative potential energy?
(c) Which set requires the most work to separate the charges to infinity? Assume
the charges all have the same magnitude.

and

Q

Q

1

RESPONSE The  potential  energy  equals  the  work  required  to  bring  the  two
(q).
charges near each other, starting at a great distance
charge
Q
Q
close to the first from a great
is already there. To bring a second charge
distance away

requires external work

Assume the left

(q)

(±)

1

2

+

–

+

+

(i)

(ii)

(iii)

–

+

FIGURE 17–11 Example 17–7.

Wext = Q

2

V = k

Q
Q
1
r

2

where r is the final distance between them. Thus the potential energy of the two
charges is

pe = k

Q

Q
1
2
r

.

(a) Set (iii) has a positive potential energy because the charges have the same
pe
.
sign. (b)  Both  (i)  and  (ii)  have  opposite  signs  of  charge  and  negative
Because r is smaller in (i), the
is most negative for (i). (c) Set (i) will require
the  most  work  for  separation  to  infinity. The  more  negative  the  potential
up to
energy, the more work required to separate the charges and bring the
zero

as in Fig. 17–9b.

(r = q),

pe

pe

EXERCISE D Return to the Chapter-Opening Question, page 473, and answer it again
now. Try to explain why you may have answered differently the first time.

SECTION 17–5 Electric Potential Due to Point Charges

481

P

*

17–6 Potential Due to Electric Dipole;

Dipole Moment

Two equal point charges Q, of opposite sign, separated by a distance  are called
an electric dipole. The electric field lines and equipotential surfaces for a dipole
were shown in Fig. 17–7. Because electric dipoles occur often in physics, as well as
in other disciplines such as molecular biology, it is useful to examine them more
closely.

The electric potential at an arbitrary point P due to a dipole, Fig. 17–12, is the

l,

r

r

sum of the potentials due to each of the two charges:

V =

kQ
r

+

k(–Q)
r + ¢r

= kQ a 1
r

-

1
r + ¢r

b = kQ

¢r
r(r + ¢r)

,

Δr
−Q

u

l

+Q

FIGURE 17–12 Electric dipole.
Calculation of potential V at point P.

P H Y S I C S   A P P L I E D
Dipoles in molecular biology

TABLE 17–2 Dipole Moments
of Selected Molecules

Molecule
(±)O(–)
H2
H(±)Cl(–)
N(–)H3
(±)
»N(–) ¬ H(±)
»C(±) “ O(–)

Dipole Moment
(C (cid:2) m)
6.1 * 10–30
3.4 * 10–30
5.0 * 10–30
L 3.0 * 10–30
L 8.0 * 10–30

‡

‡

‡ These last two groups often appear on
larger molecules; hence the value for the
dipole moment will vary somewhat,
depending on the rest of the molecule.

P H Y S I C S   A P P L I E D
Uses of capacitors

where r is the distance from P to the positive charge and
is the distance
to  the  negative  charge. This  equation  becomes  simpler  if  we  consider  points  P
whose  distance  from  the  dipole  is  much  larger  than  the  separation  of  the  two
charges—that  is, for
since
r W ¢r = l cos u,
in the denominator as compared to r. Then
we obtain

From  Fig. 17–12  we  see  that

r W l.
we can neglect

¢r = l cos u;

¢r

r + ¢r

V L

kQl cos u
r2

.

[dipole; r W l]

(17;6a)

We see that the potential decreases as the square of the distance from the dipole,
whereas for a single point charge the potential decreases with the first power of
the distance (Eq. 17–5). It is not surprising that the potential should fall off faster
for a dipole: when you are far from a dipole, the two equal but opposite charges
appear so close together as to tend to neutralize each other.

The product

Ql

in Eq. 17–6a is referred to as the dipole moment, p, of the

dipole. Equation 17–6a in terms of the dipole moment is

V L

kp cos u
r2

.

[dipole; r W l]

(17;6b)

A dipole moment has units of coulomb-meters
smaller unit called a debye is sometimes used:

(C(cid:2)m),

although for molecules a

1 debye = 3.33 * 10–30 C(cid:2)m.

In many molecules, even though they are electrically neutral, the electrons spend
more time in the vicinity of one atom than another, which results in a separation
of charge. Such molecules have a dipole moment and are called polar molecules.
We already saw that water (Fig. 16–4) is a polar molecule, and we have encoun-
tered others in our discussion of molecular biology (Section 16–10). Table 17–2
gives the dipole moments for several molecules. The
signs indicate on
which atoms these charges lie. The last two entries are a part of many organic
molecules and play an important role in molecular biology.

and

–

±

17–7 Capacitance

A capacitor is a device that can store electric charge, and normally consists of two
conducting  objects  (usually  plates  or  sheets)  placed  near  each  other  but  not
touching. Capacitors  are  widely  used  in  electronic  circuits  and  sometimes  are
called condensers. Capacitors store charge for later use, such as in a camera flash,
and  as  energy  backup  in  devices  like  computers  if  the  power  fails. Capacitors
also block surges of charge and energy to protect circuits. Very tiny capacitors
serve  as  memory  for  the “ones” and “zeros” of  the  binary  code  in  the  random
access  memory  (RAM)  of  computers  and  other  electronic  devices  (as  in
Fig. 17–35). Capacitors serve many other applications as well, some of which we
will discuss.

482 CHAPTER 17 Electric Potential

Insulator

A

FIGURE 17–13
Capacitors: diagrams of
(a) parallel plate,
(b) cylindrical (rolled up
parallel plate). (c) Photo
of some real capacitors.

(a)

d

(b)

(c)

A simple capacitor consists of a pair of parallel plates of area A separated by
a small distance d (Fig. 17–13a). Often the two plates are rolled into the form of a
cylinder with paper or other insulator separating the plates, Fig. 17–13b; Fig. 17–13c
is a photo of some actual capacitors used for various applications. In circuit diagrams,
the symbol

or

[capacitor symbol]

represents a capacitor. A battery, which is a source of voltage, is indicated by the
symbol

(cid:3) (cid:4)
with unequal arms.

[battery symbol]

If a voltage is applied across a capacitor by connecting the capacitor to a bat-
tery with conducting wires as in Fig. 17–14, charge flows from the battery to each
of the two plates: one plate acquires a negative charge, the other an equal amount
of positive charge. Each battery terminal and the plate of the capacitor connected
to it are at the same potential; hence the full battery voltage appears across the
capacitor. For a given capacitor, it is found that the amount of charge Q acquired
by each plate is proportional to the magnitude of the potential difference V between
the plates:

(17;7)
The  constant  of  proportionality, C, in  Eq. 17–7  is  called  the  capacitance of
the  capacitor. The  unit  of  capacitance  is  coulombs  per  volt, and  this  unit  is
called  a  farad (F). Common  capacitors  have  capacitance  in  the  range  of  1 pF
Apicofarad = 10–12 FB
The  relation, Eq. 17–7,
103 mF
was first suggested by Volta in the late eighteenth century.

Amicrofarad = 10–6 FB.

Q = CV.

to

In Eq. 17–7 and from now on, we will use simply V (in italics) to represent a
or

potential difference, such as that produced by a battery, rather than
Vb - Va ,

as previously.

Vba , ¢V,

Also, be sure not to confuse italic letters V and C which stand for voltage and
capacitance, with non-italic V and C which stand for the units volts and coulombs.
The capacitance C does not in general depend on Q or V. Its value depends
only on the size, shape, and relative position of the two conductors, and also on the
material that separates them. For a parallel-plate capacitor whose plates have area A
and are separated by a distance d of air (Fig. 17–13a), the capacitance is given by

C = (cid:4)

A
d

.

0

[parallel-plate capacitor]

(17;8)

(cid:4)

We see that C depends only on geometric factors, A and d, and not on Q or V.
We derive this useful relation in the optional subsection at the end of this Section.
is the permittivity of free space, which, as we saw in Chapter 16,
The constant
has the value 8.85 * 10–12 C2(cid:2)N(cid:2)m2.
EXERCISE E Graphs for charge versus voltage are shown in Fig. 17–15 for three capac-
itors, A, B, and C. Which has the greatest capacitance?

0

FIGURE 17–14 (a) Parallel-plate
capacitor connected to a battery.
(b) Same circuit shown using
symbols.

(cid:3)Q (cid:4)Q

+

+

+

+

+

+

−

−

−

−

−

−

12 V
(cid:3) (cid:4)

(a)

C

(cid:3) (cid:4)

V
(b)

C A U T I O N

V = potential

difference from here on

FIGURE 17–15 Exercise E.

Q

B

C

A

V

SECTION 17–7 Capacitance 483

EXAMPLE 17;8
Capacitor calculations. (a) Calculate the capacitance of a
20 cm * 3.0 cm
parallel-plate capacitor whose plates are
and are separated by a
1.0-mm air gap. (b) What is the charge on each plate if a 12-V battery is connected
across the two plates? (c) What is the electric field between the plates? (d) Esti-
mate the area of the plates needed to achieve a capacitance of 1 F, assuming the
air gap d is 100 times smaller, or 10 microns (1 micron
APPROACH The  capacitance  is  found  by  using  Eq. 17–8,
The
charge on each plate is obtained from the definition of capacitance, Eq. 17–7,
Q = CV.
The electric field is uniform, so we can use Eq. 17–4b for the magnitude
E = V(cid:2)d.
In (d) we use Eq. 17–8 again.
SOLUTION (a) The  area
The capacitance C is then

A = A20 * 10–2 mBA3.0 * 10–2 mB = 6.0 * 10–3 m2
.

= 1 mm = 10–6 m)
.
A(cid:2)d.
C = (cid:4)

0

C = (cid:4)

A
d

0

= A8.85 * 10–12 C2(cid:2)N(cid:2)m2B 6.0 * 10–3 m2
1.0 * 10–3 m

= 53 pF.

(b) The charge on each plate is

Q = CV

= A53 * 10–12 FB(12 V) = 6.4 * 10–10 C.

(c) From Eq. 17–4b for a uniform electric field, the magnitude of E is

E =

V
d

=

12 V
1.0 * 10–3 m

= 1.2 * 104 V(cid:2)m.

(d) We solve for A in Eq. 17–8 and substitute
to find that we need plates with an area

C = 1.0 F

and

d = 1.0 * 10–5 m

A = Cd
(cid:4)

(1 F)A1.0 * 10–5 mB
A9 * 10–12 C2(cid:2)N(cid:2)m2B
103 m
NOTE This is the area of a square
iently large. Large-capacitance capacitors will not be simple parallel plates.

or 1 km on a side. That is inconven-

L 106 m2.

L

0

P H Y S I C S   A P P L I E D
Capacitor as power backup;
condenser microphone;
computer keyboard

C

Sound
pressure

Movable plate
(diaphragm)

R
+
–

Voutput

V

FIGURE 17–16 Diagram of a
condenser microphone.

FIGURE 17–17 Key on a computer
keyboard. Pressing the key reduces the
plate spacing, increasing the capacitance.

Key

Movable
plate

Insulator
(ﬂexible)

Capacitor

Fixed
plate

Not long ago, a capacitance greater than a few mF was unusual. Today capacitors
are available that are 1 or 2 F, yet they are just a few cm on a side. Such capacitors are
used as power backups, for example, in computer memory and electronics where
the time and date can be maintained through tiny charge flow. [Capacitors are
superior to rechargable batteries for this purpose because they can be recharged
more than
times with no degradation.] Such high-capacitance capacitors can
be made of activated carbon which has very high porosity, so that the surface area
is very large; one-tenth of a gram of activated carbon can have a surface area of
100 m2.
Furthermore, the equal and opposite charges exist in an electric “double
thick. Thus, the  capacitance  of  0.1 g  of  activated  carbon,
layer” about
whose internal area can be
is equivalent to a parallel-plate capacitor with
C L (cid:4)

A(cid:2)d = A8.85 * 10–12 C2(cid:2)N(cid:2)m2BA102 m2B(cid:2)A10–9 mB L 1 F.

10–9 m

102 m2,

105

C r A(cid:2)d

The proportionality,

in Eq. 17–8, is valid also for a parallel-plate
capacitor that is rolled up into a spiral cylinder, as in Fig. 17–13b. However, the
constant factor,
must be replaced if an insulator such as paper separates the
plates, as is usual, as discussed in the next Section.

0 ,

(cid:4)

0

One type of microphone is a condenser, or capacitor, microphone, diagrammed
in Fig. 17–16. The changing air pressure in a sound wave causes one plate of the
capacitor C to move back and forth. The voltage across the capacitor changes at
the same frequency as the sound wave.

Some computer keyboards operate by capacitance. As shown in Fig. 17–17,
each key is connected to the upper plate of a capacitor. The upper plate moves
down when the key is pressed, reducing the spacing between the capacitor plates,
and  increasing  the  capacitance  (Eq. 17–8: smaller  d, larger  C). The  change
in  capacitance  results  in  an  electric  signal  that  is  detected  by  an  electronic
circuit.

484 CHAPTER 17 Electric Potential

*

Derivation of Capacitance for Parallel-Plate Capacitor
Equation  17–8  can  be  derived  using  the  result  from  Section  16–12  on  Gauss’s
law, namely that the electric field between two parallel plates is given by Eq. 16–10:

E =

Q(cid:2)A
(cid:4)

0

.

We combine this with Eq. 17–4a, using magnitudes,
Q
A(cid:4)

0
Then, from Eq. 17–7, the definition of capacitance,

V = ¢

≤ d.

V = Ed,

to obtain

C =

Q
V

=

which is Eq. 17–8.

Q

AQ(cid:2)A(cid:4)

Bd

0

= (cid:4)

0

A
d

17–8 Dielectrics

In most capacitors there is an insulating sheet of material, such as paper or plastic,
called a dielectric between the plates (Fig. 17–18). This serves several purposes.
First, dielectrics break down (allowing electric charge to flow) less readily than air,
so higher voltages can be applied without charge passing across the gap. Further-
more, a dielectric allows the plates to be placed closer together without touching,
thus allowing an increased capacitance because d is smaller in Eq. 17–8. Thirdly,
it is found experimentally that if the dielectric fills the space between the two con-
ductors, it increases the capacitance by a factor K, known as the dielectric constant.
Thus, for a parallel-plate capacitor,

C = K(cid:4)

0

.

(17;9)

A
d

This can be written

C = (cid:4)

A
d

,

where

(cid:4) = K(cid:4)

0

is called the permittivity of the material.

The values of the dielectric constant for various materials are given in Table 17–3.
Also shown in Table 17–3 is the dielectric strength, the maximum electric field
before breakdown (charge flow) occurs.
CONCEPTUAL EXAMPLE 17;9
Inserting a dielectric at constant V. An
air-filled capacitor consisting of two parallel plates separated by a distance d is
connected to a battery of constant voltage V and acquires a charge Q. While it
is still connected to the battery, a slab of dielectric material with
is inserted
between the plates of the capacitor. Will Q increase, decrease, or stay the same?

K = 3

RESPONSE Since the capacitor remains connected to the battery, the voltage
stays constant and equal to the battery voltage V. The capacitance C increases
when  the  dielectric  material  is  inserted  because  K in  Eq. 17–9  has  increased.
From the relation
if V stays constant, but C increases, Q must increase
as well. As the dielectric is inserted, more charge will be pulled from the battery
and deposited onto the plates of the capacitor as its capacitance increases.

Q = CV,

EXERCISE  F If  the  dielectric  in  Example  17–9  fills  the  space  between  the  plates, by
what factor does (a) the capacitance change, (b) the charge on each plate change?
CONCEPTUAL EXAMPLE 17;10
Inserting a dielectric into an isolated
capacitor. Suppose the air-filled capacitor of Example 17–9 is charged (to Q)
and then disconnected from the battery. Next a dielectric is inserted between the
plates. Will Q, C, or V change?
RESPONSE The charge Q remains the same—the capacitor is isolated, so there
is nowhere for the charge to go. The capacitance increases as a result of inserting
the  dielectric  (Eq. 17–9). The  voltage  across  the  capacitor  also  changes—it
Q = CV,
decreases because, by  Eq. 17–7,
if  Q stays  constant
and C increases (it is in the denominator), then V decreases.

V = Q(cid:2)C;

so

FIGURE 17–18 A cylindrical
capacitor, unrolled from its case to
show the dielectric between the
plates. See also Fig. 17–13b.

TABLE 17–3
Dielectric Constants (at 20°C)

Dielectric  Dielectric
constant
strength
(V(cid:5)m)
K

Material

1.0000
1.0006
2.2
2.6
2–4
3.7
4.3
4
5

Vacuum
Air (1 atm)
Paraffin
Polystyrene
Vinyl (plastic)
Paper
Quartz
Oil
Glass, Pyrex
Rubber,
6.7
neoprene
6–8
Porcelain
Mica
7
Water (liquid)  80
Strontium
titanate

300

3 * 106
10 * 106
24 * 106
50 * 106
15 * 106
8 * 106
12 * 106
14 * 106

12 * 106
5 * 106
150 * 106

8 * 106

SECTION 17–8 485

*

(cid:3)Q
(cid:3)
(cid:3)
(cid:3)
(cid:3)
(cid:3)
(cid:3)
(cid:3)

(cid:3)
(cid:3)
(cid:3)
(cid:3)
(cid:3)
(cid:3)
(cid:3)

(cid:3)
(cid:3)
(cid:3)
(cid:3)
(cid:3)
(cid:3)
(cid:3)

(a)

(cid:4)(cid:3)

(cid:4)(cid:3)

(cid:4)(cid:3)

(cid:4)(cid:3)

(cid:4)(cid:3)

(cid:4)(cid:3)

(cid:4)(cid:3)

(cid:4)(cid:3)

(cid:4)(cid:3)

(cid:4)(cid:3)

(cid:4)(cid:3)

(cid:4)(cid:3)

(cid:4)(cid:3)

(cid:4)(cid:3)

(cid:4)(cid:3)

(cid:4)(cid:3)

(cid:4)(cid:3)

(cid:4)(cid:3)

(cid:4)(cid:3)

(cid:4)(cid:3)

(cid:4)(cid:3)

(b)

(cid:4)

(cid:4)

(cid:4)

(cid:3)

(cid:3)

(cid:3)

(cid:4)Q
(cid:4)
(cid:4)
(cid:4)
(cid:4)
(cid:4)
(cid:4)
(cid:4)

(cid:4)
(cid:4)
(cid:4)
(cid:4)
(cid:4)
(cid:4)
(cid:4)

(cid:4)
(cid:4)
(cid:4)
(cid:4)
(cid:4)
(cid:4)
(cid:4)

E0

(c)

E0

FIGURE 17–19 Molecular view of
the effects of a dielectric.

P H Y S I C S   A P P L I E D
Camera flash

Molecular Description of Dielectrics
Let  us  examine, from  the  molecular  point  of  view, why  the  capacitance  of  a
C
capacitor should be larger when a dielectric is between the plates. A capacitor
0
–Q
whose plates are separated by an air gap has a charge
on the other (Fig. 17–19a). Assume it is isolated (not connected to a battery) so
charge cannot flow to or from the plates. The potential difference between the
plates,

is given by Eq. 17–7:

on one plate and

±Q

V
0 ,

Q = C
0

V
0 ,

where the subscripts refer to air between the plates. Now we insert a dielectric
between the plates (Fig. 17–19b). Because of the electric field between the capac-
itor  plates, the  dielectric  molecules  will  tend  to  become  oriented  as  shown  in
Fig. 17–19b. If the dielectric molecules are polar, the positive end is attracted to
the negative plate and vice versa. Even if the dielectric molecules are not polar,
electrons  within  them  will  tend  to  move  slightly  toward  the  positive  capacitor
plate, so the effect is the same. The net effect of the aligned dipoles is a net nega-
tive charge on the outer edge of the dielectric facing the positive plate, and a net
positive charge on the opposite side, as shown in Fig. 17–19c.

Some of the electric field lines, then, do not pass through the dielectric but
instead end on charges induced on the surface as shown in Fig. 17–19c. Hence
the electric field within the dielectric is less than in air. That is, the electric field
in  the  space  between  the  capacitor  plates, assumed  filled  by  the  dielectric, has
been  reduced  by  some  factor  K. The  voltage  across  the  capacitor  is  reduced
Q = CV,
by the same factor K because
the capacitance C must increase by that same factor K to keep Q constant.

(Eq. 17–4) and hence, by Eq. 17–7,

V = Ed

17–9 Storage of Electric Energy

separating + and - charges.

The
A charged capacitor stores electric energy by
energy stored in a capacitor will be equal to the work done to charge it. The net
effect of charging a capacitor is to remove charge from one plate and add it to the
other  plate. This  is  what  a  battery  does  when  it  is  connected  to  a  capacitor.
A capacitor does not become charged instantly. It takes some time, often very little
(Section 19–6). Initially, when the capacitor is uncharged, no work is required to
move the first bit of charge over. As more charge is transferred, work is needed
to move charge against the increasing voltage V. The work needed to add a small
when  a  potential  difference  V is  across  the  plates, is
amount  of  charge
¢W = V ¢q.
The  total  work  needed  to  move  total  charge  Q is  equivalent  to
moving  all  the  charge  Q across  a  voltage  equal  to  the  average voltage  during
the  process. (This  is  just  like  calculating  the  work  done  to  compress  a  spring,
Section 6–4, page 148.) The average voltage is
is the
final voltage; so the work to move the total charge Q from one plate to the other is

AVf - 0B(cid:2)2 = Vf(cid:2)2,

where

¢q,

Vf

W = Q

Vf
2

.

Thus we can say that the electric potential energy, PE, stored in a capacitor is

pe = energy = 1

2 QV,

where V is the potential difference between the plates (we dropped the subscript),
and Q is the charge on each plate. Since

we can also write

Q = CV,

pe = 1

2 QV = 1

2 CV2 = 1

2

Q2
C

.

(17;10)

EXAMPLE 17;11
Energy  stored  in  a  capacitor. A  camera  flash  unit
(Fig. 17–20) stores energy in a
capacitor at 330 V. (a) How much electric
energy can be stored? (b) What is the power output if nearly all this energy is
released in 1.0 ms?
APPROACH We use Eq. 17–10 in the form
C and V.

because we are given

660-mF

pe = 1

2 CV2

486 CHAPTER 17 Electric Potential

SOLUTION (a) The energy stored is

pe = 1

2 CV2 = 1
(b) If this energy is released in
power output is P = pe(cid:2)t = (36 J)(cid:2)A1.0 * 10–3 sB = 36,000 W.

A660 * 10–6 FB(330 V)2 = 36 J.

of a second

1
1000

2

A =  1.0 ms = 1.0 * 10–3 sB,

the

EXERCISE G A capacitor stores 0.50 J of energy at 9.0 V. What is its capacitance?

CONCEPTUAL EXAMPLE 17;12
Capacitor plate separation increased.
A parallel-plate capacitor carries charge Q and is then disconnected from a
battery. The two plates are initially separated by a distance d. Suppose the plates
are pulled apart until the separation is 2d. How has the energy stored in this
capacitor changed?

FIGURE 17–20 A camera flash unit.
The
cylinder.

capacitor is the black

660-mF

A(cid:2)d,

C = (cid:4)

RESPONSE If we increase the plate separation d, we decrease the capacitance
according  to  Eq. 17–8,
by  a  factor  of  2. The  charge  Q hasn’t
0
Q2(cid:2)C
changed. So according to Eq. 17–10, where we choose the form
because we know Q is the same and C has been halved, the reduced C means
the PE stored increases by a factor of 2.
NOTE We  can  see  why  the  energy  stored  increases  from  a  physical  point  of
view: the two plates are charged equal and opposite, so they attract each other.
If we pull them apart, we must do work, so we raise the potential energy.

pe = 1
2

It is useful to think of the energy stored in a capacitor as being stored in the
electric field between the plates. As an example let us calculate the energy stored
in a parallel-plate capacitor in terms of the electric field.

We  have  seen  that  the  electric  field

between  two  close  parallel  plates  is
nearly  uniform  and  its  magnitude  is  related  to  the  potential  difference  by
V = Ed
A(cid:2)d
for a parallel-plate capacitor. Thus

(Eq. 17–4), where d is the separation. Also, Eq. 17–8 tells us

C = (cid:4)

0

B
E

pe = 1

2 CV2 = 1
E2Ad.

2

(cid:4)

0

= 1
2

¢

(cid:4)

A
0
d

≤ AE2d2B

The quantity Ad is the volume between the plates in which the electric field E
exists. If  we  divide  both  sides  of  this  equation  by  the  volume, we  obtain  an
expression for the energy per unit volume or energy density:

energy density =

pe
volume

= 1
2

(cid:4)

0

E2.

(17;11)

The electric energy stored per unit volume in any region of space is proportional to
the square of the electric field in that region. We derived Eq. 17–11 for the special
case of a parallel-plate capacitor. But it can be shown to be true for any region of
space where there is an electric field. Indeed, we will use this result when we dis-
cuss electromagnetic radiation (Chapter 22).

Health Effects
The energy stored in a large capacitance can give you a burn or a shock. One reason
you are warned not to touch a circuit, or open an electronic device, is because
capacitors may still be carrying charge even if the external power is turned off.
On the other hand, the basis of a heart defibrillator is a capacitor charged to
a high voltage. A heart attack can be characterized by fast irregular beating of
the heart, known as ventricular (or cardiac) fibrillation. The heart then does not
pump blood to the rest of the body properly, and if the interruption lasts for long,
death results. A sudden, brief jolt of charge through the heart from a defibrillator
can cause complete heart stoppage, sometimes followed by a resumption of normal
beating. The defibrillator capacitor is charged to a high voltage, typically a few
thousand volts, and is allowed to discharge very rapidly through the heart via a
pair of wide contacts known as “pads” or “paddles” that spread out the current
over the chest (Fig. 17–21).

P H Y S I C S   A P P L I E D
Shocks, burns, defibrillators

FIGURE 17–21 Heart defibrillator.

SECTION 17–9 Storage of Electric Energy 487

V

0

V

0

(a)

(b)

time, t

time, t

FIGURE 17–22 Two kinds of signal
voltage: (a) sinusoidal, (b) a pulse,
both analog. Many other shapes are
possible.

TABLE 17–4
Binary to Decimal

Binary†
number

00000000
00000001
00000010
00000011
00000100
00000111
00001000
00100101
11111111

Decimal
number

0
1
2
3
4
7
8
37
255

†Note that we start counting from right
to left: the 1’s digit is on the far right,
then the 2’s, the 4’s, the 8’s, the 16’s, the
32’s, the 64’s, and the 128’s.

FIGURE 17–24 The red analog sine
wave, which is at a 100-Hz frequency
(1 wavelength is done in 0.010 s), has
been converted to a 2-bit (4 level)
digital signal (blue).

6 V

0.010 s
t

11

10
0 s
01

00

0 V

Bit levels

488 CHAPTER 17

17–10 Digital; Binary Numbers;

Signal Voltage

Batteries and a wall plug are meant to provide a constant supply voltage as power
to operate a flashlight, an electric heater, and other electric and electronic devices.
A signal voltage, on the other hand, is a voltage intended to affect something
else. A  signal  voltage  varies  in  time  and  can  also  be  very  brief. For  example,
a  sound  such  as  a  pure  tone, which  may  be  sinusoidal  as  we  discussed  in
Chapters 11 and 12 (see Figs. 11–24 and 12–14), will produce an output voltage
from  a  high  quality  microphone  that  is  also  sinusoidal. That  signal  voltage  is
amplified  and  reaches  a  loudspeaker, making  it  produce  the  sound  we  hear.
Signal voltages (see Fig. 17–22) are sometimes a simple pulse (as in Figs. 11–23
and 11–33), and often act to change some aspect of an electronic device.

Signal voltages are sent to cell phones (“I’ve got signal”), to computers from
the Internet, or to TV sets with the information on the picture and sound. Not long
ago, signal voltages were analog—the voltage varied continuously, as in Fig. 17–22.
Today, television and computer signals are digital and use a binary number
system to represent a numerical value. In a normal number, such as 609, there are
ten choices for each digit—from 0 to 9—and normal numbers are called decimal
(Latin for ten). In a binary number, each digit or bit has only two possibilities,
0  or  1  (sometimes  referred  to  as “off” or “on”). In  binary, 0001  means “one,”
0010 means 2, 0011 means 3, and 1101 means
in decimal.
See Table 17–4, and note that counting starts from the right, just as in regular
decimal (the “ones” digit is last, on the far right, then to the left is the “tens” and
then “hundreds”: for 609, the “ones” are 9, the “hundreds” are 6). Any value can
be  represented  by  a  voltage  pattern  something  like  that  shown  in  Fig. 17–23.

8 + 4 + 0 + 1 = 13

FIGURE 17–23 A traveling digital signal:
voltage vs. position x or time  . If standing alone,
this sequence would represent 10011001 or 153
((cid:3)  128 + 0 +

0 + 16 + 8 + 0 + 0 + 1).

t

Voltage

5 V

0

128’s

64’s

32’s 16’s 8’s

4’s

2’s

1’s

t   or x

±5 V
A “1” is  a  positive  voltage  such  as
. The  brightness
signal, for example, that goes to each of the millions of tiny picture elements or
“subpixels” of a TV or computer screen (Fig. 17–31, Section 17–11), is contained
in a byte. One byte is 8 bits, which means

, whereas  a “0” is

0 V

each byte of 8 bits allows

28 = 256

possibilities

(that is, 0 to 255) or 256 shades for each of 3 colors: red, green, blue. The full
possibilities.
color of each pixel (the three subpixel colors) has
Digital television signals, which we discuss in the next Section, are transmitted
at about
pass a given point
per  second, or  one  bit  every  53  nanoseconds. We  could  write  this  in  terms  of
bytes as 2.4 MB s, where for bytes we use capital B.

Megabits per second. So

(256)3 = 17 * 106

19 Mb(cid:2)s = 19

19 * 106 bits

(cid:2)

When an analog signal, such as the pure sine wave of Fig. 17–22a, is converted
to digital (analog-to-digital converter, ADC), the digital signal may look like the
blue squared-off curve of Fig. 17–24. The digital signal has a limited number of
discrete values. The difference between the original continuous analog signal and
its digital approximation is called the quantization error or quantization loss. To min-
imize that loss, there are two important factors: (i) the resolution or bit depth, which
is the number of bits or values for the voltage of each sample ( measurement);
(ii) the sampling rate, which is the number of times per second the original analog
voltage is measured (“sampled”).

Consider a digital approximation for a 100-Hz sine wave: Figure 17–24 shows
(i)  a  0  to  6-V, 2-bit  depth, measuring  only  4  possible  voltages  (00, 01, 10, 11,
or 0, 1, 2, 3 in decimal), and (ii) a sampling rate of (9 samples in one cycle or
(cid:2)
) which is 900 samples s or 900 Hz. This is very
wavelength
poor quality. For high quality reproduction, a greater bit depth and higher sampling
rate are needed, which requires more memory, and more data to be transmitted.

(cid:2)s = 100 Hz

100 cycles

) * (

=

For audio CDs, the sampling rate is 44.1 kHz (44,100 samplings every second)
28 * 28 = 216 L 65,000
and 16-bit resolution, meaning each sampled voltage can have
different  voltage  levels  between, say, 0  and  5  volts. See  Fig. 17–25  for  details.
voltage
Audio recording today typically uses 96 kHz and 24-bit  (
levels) to give a better approximation of the original analog signal (on super-CDs
or solid-state memory), but must be transferred down to 44.1 kHz and 16-bit to
produce ordinary CDs. (DVDs can use 192 kHz sampling rate for sound.) But
iPods and MP3 players have lower sampling rates and much less detail, which many
listeners can notice.

224 L 17 * 106

V

e
g
a
t
l
o
V

0

0.25 ms

t
0.50 ms

FIGURE 17–25  The sine wave shown could represent the analog electric
signal from a microphone due to a pure 2000-Hz tone. (See Chapters 11
and 12.) The analog-to-digital electronics samples the signal—that is,
measures and records the signal’s voltage at intervals, many times per second.
Each dot on the curve represents the voltage measured (sampled) at that
point. The sampling rate in this diagram is 44,100 each second, or 44.1 kHz,
like a CD. That is, a sample is taken every
In 0.50 ms, as shown here, 22 samples (black dots) are taken. This is an
alternate way to represent sampling compared to Fig. 17-24, and shows that
we cannot see any changes that might happen between the samplings (dots).

(1 s)(cid:2)44,100 = 0.000023 s = 0.023 ms
.

Figure  17–25  gives  some  details  about  a  pure  2000-Hz  sound  sampled  at
44.1 kHz. Normal musical sounds are a complex summation of many such sine
waves of different frequencies and amplitudes. A simple summation was shown in
Fig. 12–14. Another example is shown in Fig. 17–26, where we can see that the
fine details may be missed by a digital conversion. Look at Fig. 17–25: if that were
20,000 Hz (highest frequency of human hearing), it would be sampled only about
two times per wavelength. Both those samples might be zero volts—obviously missing
the  entire  waveform. Over  many  wavelengths, it  might  eventually  reproduce  the
waveform somewhat well. But many sounds only last milliseconds, like the initial
attack of a piano note or plucked guitar string. Many audiophiles hear the difference
between an original vinyl record and its subsequent release as a CD at 44.1 kHz.
Digital audio signals must be converted back to analog (digital-to-analog converter,
DAC) before being sent to a loudspeaker or headset. Even in a TV, the digital
signals  are  converted  to  analog  voltages  before  addressing  the  pixels  (next
Section), although the picture itself might be said to be digital since it is made up
of separate pixels.

Digital photographs are made up of millions of “pixels” to produce a sharp
image that is not “pixelated” or blurry. Also important (and complicated) are the
number of bits provided for colors, plus the ability of the sensors (Chapter 25) to
sustain a wide range of brightnesses under dim and bright light conditions.

Digital data has some real advantages: for one, it can be compressed, in the
sense  that repeated  information  can  be  reduced  so  that  less  memory  space  is
required—fewer bits and bytes. For example, adjacent “pixels” on a photograph
that includes a blue sky may be essentially identical. If 200 almost identical pixels
can be coded as identical, that takes up less memory (or “size”) than to specify all
the 200 pixels individually. Compression schemes, like jpeg for photos, lose some
information and may be noticeable. In audio, MP3 players use one-tenth the space
that a CD does, but many listeners don’t notice. Compression is one reason that
more  data  or “information” can  be  transmitted  digitally  for  a  given  bandwidth.
[Bandwidth is the fixed range of frequencies allotted to each radio or TV station
or Internet connection, and limits the number of bits transmitted per second.]

In audio, many listeners claim that digital does not match analog in full sound

quality. And what about movies? Will digital ever match Technicolor?

*

Noise
Digital information transmission has another advantage: any distortion or unwanted
(external) electrical signal that intrudes from outside, broadly called noise, can
badly corrupt an analog signal: Fig. 17–27a shows a time-varying analog signal, and
Fig. 17–27b shows nasty outside noise interfering with it. But a digital signal is
still readable unless the noise is very large, on the order of half the bit signal itself
(Figs. 17–27c and d).

FIGURE 17–26  This type of complex
signal is much more normal than the
pure sine wave of Fig. 17–25.
Sampling may not catch all the details,
especially because the waveform is
changing very fast in time.

V

0

t

FIGURE 17–27 (a) Original analog
signal and (b) the same signal dirtied up
=
by outside signals ( noise). (c) A digital
signal is still readable (d) without
error if the noise is not too great.

(a) Analog signal

(b) Analog signal plus noise

(c) Digital signal

(d) Digital signal plus noise

SECTION 17–10 489

Cathode

(cid:3) (cid:2)

Anode

(cid:2)(cid:3)
Battery

FIGURE 17–28 If the cathode inside
the evacuated glass tube is heated to
glowing (by an electric current, not
shown), negatively charged
=
“cathode rays” (
“boiled off” and flow across to the
anode
attracted.

to which they are

electrons) are

(±),

P H Y S I C S   A P P L I E D
CRT

*

17–11 TV and Computer Monitors:
CRTs, Flat Screens

The first television receivers used a cathode ray tube (CRT), and as recently as
2008 they accounted for half of all new TV sales. Two years later it was tough to
find a new CRT set to buy. Even though new TV sets are flat screen plasma or
liquid crystal displays (LCD), an understanding of how a CRT works is useful.

*

CRT
The operation of a CRT depends on thermionic emission, discovered by Thomas
Edison (1847–1931). Consider a voltage applied to two small electrodes inside an
evacuated glass “tube” as shown in Fig. 17–28: the cathode is negative, and the
anode is positive. If the cathode is heated (usually by an electric current) so that
it becomes hot and glowing, it is found that negative charges leave the cathode
and flow to the positive anode. These negative charges are now called electrons,
but originally they were called cathode rays because they seemed to come from
the cathode (more detail in Section 27–1 on the discovery of the electron).

Figure 17–29 is a simplified sketch of a CRT which is contained in an evacuated
glass tube. A beam of electrons, emitted by the heated cathode, is accelerated by
the high-voltage anode and passes through a small hole in that anode. The inside
of the tube face on the right (the screen) is coated with a fluorescent material that
glows at the spot where the electrons hit. Voltage applied across the horizontal
and vertical deflection plates, Fig. 17–29, can be varied to deflect the electron beam
to different spots on the screen.

Cathode Anode

Horizontal
deﬂection plates

FIGURE 17–29 A cathode-ray
tube. Magnetic deflection coils are
commonly used in place of the electric
deflection plates shown here. The
relative positions of the elements
have been exaggerated for clarity.

Heater
current

Grid

Vertical
deﬂection plates

Path of
electrons

Fluorescent
screen

Bright spot
on screen
where
electrons hit

P H Y S I C S   A P P L I E D
TV and computer monitors

FIGURE 17–30 Electron beam sweeps
across a CRT television screen in a
succession of horizontal lines. Each
horizontal sweep is made by varying
the voltage on the horizontal deflection
plates (Fig. 17–29). Then the electron
beam is moved down a short distance
by a change in voltage on the vertical
deflection plates, and the process
(referred to as a raster) is repeated.

490 CHAPTER 17

In TV and computer monitors, the CRT electron beam sweeps over the screen
in the manner shown in Fig. 17–30 by carefully synchronized voltages applied to
the deflection plates (more commonly by magnetic deflection coils—Chapter 20).
During each horizontal sweep of the electron beam, the grid (Fig. 17–29) receives a
signal voltage that limits the flow of electrons at each instant during the sweep;
the more negative the grid voltage is, the more electrons are repelled and fewer
pass through, producing a less bright spot on the screen. Thus the varying grid
voltage is responsible for the brightness of each spot on the screen. At the end of
each  horizontal  sweep  of  the  electron  beam, the  horizontal  deflection  voltage
changes dramatically to bring the beam back to the opposite side of the screen,
and  the  vertical  voltage  changes  slightly  so  the  beam  begins  a  new  horizontal
sweep slightly below the previous one. The difference in brightness of the spots on
the screen forms the “picture.” Color screens have red, green, and blue phosphors
which glow when struck by the electron beam. The various brightnesses of adjacent
red, green, and  blue  phosphors  (so  close  together  we  don’t  distinguish  them)
produce almost any color. Analog TV for the U.S. provided 480 visible horizontal
sweeps† to  form  a  complete  picture  every
. With  30  new  frames  or  pictures
every second (25 in countries with 50-Hz line voltage), a “moving picture” is displayed
on the TV screen. (Note: commercial movies on film are 24 frames per second.)

1
30

 s

†525 lines in total, but only 480 form the picture; the other 45 lines contain other information such as
every  other  line  is  traced, and  in  the
synchronization. The  sweep  is  interlaced: that  is, every
next

, the lines in between are traced.

1
60

 s

 s

1
60

FIGURE 17–31 Close up of a tiny
section of two typical LCD screens.
You can even make out wires and
transistors in the one on the right.

*

Flat Screens and Addressing Pixels
Today’s flat screens contain millions of tiny picture elements, or pixels. Each pixel
consists of 3 subpixels, a red, a green, and a blue. A close up of a common arrange-
ment of pixels is shown in Fig. 17–31 for an LCD screen. (How liquid crystals work
in an LCD screen is described in Section 24–11.) Subpixels are so small that at
normal  viewing  distances  we  don’t  distinguish  them  and  the  separate  red  (R),
green (G), and blue (B) subpixels blend to produce almost any color, depending
on the relative brightnesses of the three subpixels. Liquid crystals act as filters
(R, G, and  B)  that  filter  the  light  from  a  white  backlight, usually  fluorescent
lamps  or  light-emitting  diodes (LED, Section  29–9).† The  picture  you  see  on
the screen depends on the level of brightness of each subpixel, as suggested in
Fig. 17–32 for a simple black and white picture.

P H Y S I C S   A P P L I E D

How flat screens work

FIGURE 17–32 Example of an
image made up of many small
squares or pixels (picture elements).
This one has rather low resolution.

between its front and its back: if this voltage
brightness; if

High definition (HD) television screens have 1080 horizontal rows of pixels,
each row consisting of 1920 pixels across the screen. That is, there are 1920 vertical
columns, for a total of nearly 2 million pixels. Today, television in the U.S. is trans-
mitted digitally at a rate of 60 Hz—that is, 60 frames or pictures per second (50 Hz
in many countries) which makes the “moving picture.” To form one frame, each
subpixel must have the correct brightness. We now describe one way of doing this.
The brightness of each LCD subpixel (Section 24–11) depends on the voltage
is zero, that subpixel is at maximum
volts), that subpixel is dark.
Giving  the  correct  voltage  (to  provide  the  correct  brightness)  is  called
addressing the  subpixel. Typically  the  front  of  the  subpixel  is  maintained  at  a
positive voltage, such as
. On the back of the display, the voltage at each
subpixel is provided at the intersection of the 1080 horizontal wires (rows) and
1920 * 3 (colors) L 6000
vertical wires (columns). See Fig. 17–33, which shows the
array, or matrix, of wires. Each intersection of one vertical and one horizontal wire
lies behind one subpixel. Because many frames are shown per second, the signal
voltages applied are brief, like a pulse (see Fig. 17-22b or 11–23).

is at its maximum (which might be

±5 V

±5

¢V

¢V

RGB RGB RGB RGB RGB RGB RGB RGB RGB RGB RGB RGB RGB RGB RGB RGB

This pixel, with
all 3 colors shining,
would appear white
at viewing distances

0 V
0 V
0 V
0 V
0 V
0 V
0 V
0 V
20 V
0 V
0 V
0 V
0 V
0 V
0 V
0 V

0 V

20 V

. That

±20 V

) whereas all the others are at

The video signal that arrives at the display activates only one horizontal wire at
a time (the orange one in Fig. 17–33): that one horizontal wire has a voltage (let’s
say
is not applied directly to
the pixels, but allows the vertical wires to apply briefly the proper “signal voltage” to
each subpixel along that row (via a transistor, see below). These signal voltages,
known as the data stream, are applied to all the vertical wires just as that one row is
activated: they provide the correct brightness for each subpixel in that activated row.
A few subpixels are highlighted in Fig. 17–33. Immediately afterward, the other
 s
).
rows are activated, one by one, until the entire frame has been completed (in
†LEDs are discussed in Section 29–9. Home TVs advertised as LED generally mean an LCD screen
with an LED backlight. LED pixels small enough for home screens are difficult to make, but actual
LED screens are found in very large displays such as at stadiums.

1
60

(±20 V)

FIGURE 17–33 Array of wires
(a matrix) behind all the pixels on an
LCD screen. Each intersection of two
wires is at a subpixel (red, green, or
blue). One horizontal wire is activated
at a time (the orange one at the
moment shown) meaning it is at a
positive voltage
allows that one row of pixels to be
addressed at that moment; all
other horizontal wires are at
. At
this moment, the data stream arrives
to all the vertical wires, presenting the
5 V
)
needed voltage (between 0 and
to produce the correct brightness for
each of the nearly 6000 subpixels along
the activated row.

which

0 V

*SECTION 17–11 491

*

connected to
subpixel

DRAIN

SOURCE

connected to
vertical wire

GATE

attached to
horizontal wire

FIGURE 17–34 Thin-film transistor.
One is attached to each screen
subpixel.

Then a new frame is started.The addressing of subpixels for each row of each frame
serves the same purpose as the sweep of the electron beam in a CRT, Fig. 17–30.
Active Matrix (advanced)
High-definition  displays  use  an  active  matrix, meaning  that  a  tiny  thin-film
transistor (TFT) is attached to a corner of the back of each subpixel. (Transistors
are discussed in Section 29–10.) One electrode of each TFT, called the “source,” is
connected to the vertical wire which addresses that subpixel, Fig. 17–34, and the
“drain” electrode is connected to the back of the subpixel. The horizontal wire that
serves the subpixel is connected to the transistor’s gate electrode.The gate’s voltage,
by attracting charge or not, functions as a switch to connect or disconnect the source
).
voltage to the drain and to the back of the subpixel (its front is fixed at
The potential difference
across a subpixel determines if that subpixel will be
(¢V = 0)
bright in color
maximum), or something in between. See
Fig. 17–35. All the subpixel TFTs along the one activated horizontal wire (the orange
one in Fig. 17–33) will have
at the gate: the TFTs are turned “on,” like a
switch. That allows electric charge to flow, connecting the vertical wire signal volt-
age  at  each TFT  source  to  its  drain  and  to  the  back  of  the  subpixel. Thus  all
subpixels along one row receive the brightness needed for that line of the frame.

¢V
, black (

±20 V

±5 V

¢V =

. If the TFT gate is at

FIGURE 17–35 Circuit diagram for one subpixel. The
±5 V
front of the subpixel is at
(horizontal wire activated), the data stream voltage is applied
to the back of the subpixel, and determines the brightness of that
(horizontal wire not activated), the
subpixel. If the gate is at
TFT is “off”: no charge passes through, and the capacitance
helps maintain

until the subpixel is updated

later.

20 V

¢V

0 V

 s

1
60

ΔV

l
e
x
i
p
b
u
S

+5 V

+20 V
  or
  0 V

C

TFT

Data stream
voltage
(vertical wire)

Within a subpixel’s electronics is a capacitance that helps maintain the

¢V
until
(L  17 ms)
.
that subpixel is updated with a new signal for the next frame,
later
15 ms
The row below the orange one shown in Fig. 17–33 is activated about
later
C= A 1
The  6000  vertical  wires  (data  lines)  get  their  signal  voltages
60
(data stream) updated just before each row is activated in order to establish the
brightness of each subpixel in that next row. All 1080 rows are activated, one-by-one,
within

to complete that frame. Then a new frame is started.

(L  17 ms)

1
1080 lines

 sBA

B D.

1
60

 s

 s

1
60

(cid:2)

 s

1
60

New TV sets today can often refresh the screen at a higher rate. A refresh rate
of 120 Hz (or 240 Hz) means that frames are interpolated between the normal ones,
by averaging, which produces less blurring in fast action scenes.

480 * 704 pixels.

or in standard definition (SD) of

Digital TV is transmitted at about 19 MB s as mentioned in Section 17–10.
(This rate is way too slow to do a full refresh every  —try the calculation and
see—so a lot of compression is done and the areas where most movement occurs get
refreshed.) The TV set or “box” that receives the digital video signal has to decode the
signal in order to send analog voltages to the pixels of the screen, and at just the
1080 * 1920 pixels
right time. TV stations in the U.S. are allowed to broadcast HD at
or at

720 * 1280,
[When you read 1080p or 1080i for a TV, the “p” stands for “progressive,”
as  described  above. The “i” stands  for
and then
, so a full picture is done at 30 per second

meaning  an  entire  frame  is  made  in
“interlaced,” meaning all the odd rows (half the picture) are done in
all the even rows are done in the next
or 30 Hz, thus reducing the data (or bit) rate. Analog TV (US) was 480i.]
Oscilloscopes
An oscilloscope is a device for amplifying, measuring, and visually displaying an
electrical signal as a function of time on an LCD or CRT monitor, or computer
screen. The visible “trace” on the screen, which could be an electrocardiogram
(Fig. 17–36), or a signal from an experiment on nerve conduction, is a plot of the
signal  voltage  (vertically)  versus  time  (horizontally). [In  a  CRT, the  electron
beam is swept horizontally at a uniform rate in time by the horizontal deflection
plates, Figs. 17–29 and 17–30. The signal to be displayed is applied (after amplifi-
cation) to the vertical deflection plates.]

1
60

1
60

1
60

 s

 s

 s

FIGURE 17–36 An electrocardiogram
(ECG) trace displayed on a CRT.

*

P H Y S I C S   A P P L I E D
Oscilloscope

492

*

17–12 Electrocardiogram

(ECG or EKG)

Each time the heart beats, changes in electrical potential occur on its surface that
can  be  detected  using  electrodes (metal  contacts), which  are  attached  to  the
skin. The changes in potential are small, on the order of millivolts (mV), and must
be amplified. They are displayed with a chart recorder on paper, or on a monitor
(CRT or LCD), Fig. 17–36. An electrocardiogram (ECG or EKG) is the record of
the potential changes for a given person’s heart. An example is shown in Fig. 17–37.
We now look at the source of these potential changes and their relation to heart
activity.

R

P H Y S I C S   A P P L I E D

Electrocardiogram

e
g
a
t
l
o
V

P

T

Q S

FIGURE 17–37 Typical ECG.
Two heart beats are shown.

Time

10–3 C(cid:2)m2

the total charge on either surface is thus

Both muscle and nerve cells have an electric dipole layer across the cell wall.
That is, in the normal situation there is a net positive charge on the exterior surface
and a net negative charge on the interior surface, Fig. 17–38a. The amount of charge
depends on the size of the cell, but is approximately
of surface. For a cell
10–5 m2,
L 10–8 C.
whose surface area is
Just
before the contraction of heart muscles, changes occur in the cell wall, so that posi-
tive ions on the exterior of the cell are able to pass through the wall and neutralize
charge on the inside, or even make the inside surface slightly positive compared to the
exterior. This “depolarization” starts at one end of the cell and progresses toward the
opposite end, as indicated by the arrow in Fig. 17–38b, until the whole muscle is depolar-
ized; the muscle then repolarizes to its original state (Fig. 17–38a), all in less than a
second. Figure 17–38c shows rough graphs of the potential V as a function of time at
the two points P and
(on either side of this cell) as the depolarization moves across
the cell. The path of depolarization within the heart as a whole is more complicated,
and produces the complex potential difference as a function of time, Fig. 17–37.
It  is  standard  procedure  to  divide  a  typical  electrocardiogram  into  regions
corresponding  to  the  various  deflections  (or “waves”), as  shown  in  Fig. 17–37.
Each of the deflections corresponds to the activity of a particular part of the heart
beat (Fig. 10–42). The P wave corresponds to contraction of the atria. The QRS
group corresponds to contraction of the ventricles as the depolarization follows
a very complicated path. The T wave corresponds to recovery (repolarization) of
the heart in preparation for the next cycle.

P¿

The ECG is a powerful tool in identifying heart defects. For example, the right
side of the heart enlarges if the right ventricle must push against an abnormally large
load (as when blood vessels become hardened or clogged). This problem is readily
observed on an ECG, because the S wave becomes very large (negatively). Infarcts,
which are dead regions of the heart muscle that result from heart attacks, are also
detected on an ECG because they reflect the depolarization wave.

FIGURE 17–38 Heart muscle cell
showing (a) charge dipole layer in
resting state; (b) depolarization of
cell progressing as muscle begins to
contract; and (c) potential V at
points P and

as a function of time.

P¿
+
++
–––

+
–

+
+

+
–
–

+

–

–

P

(a)

––––
+ +
+

+

–

–

+
–
–

+

+
+

P'

–
–

–

+
+

–

+

+

(b)

–
+

+
+
––

+
–

+
–

–––
+
+
+

–

–

+
–
–

+

+
+

P'

At point
P

V

t

t

At point
P'

P

V

(c)

Summary

The electric potential V at any point in space is defined as the
electric potential energy per unit charge:

Va =

pea
q

.

(17;2a)

The electric potential difference between any two points
is  defined  as  the  work  done  to  move  a  1 C  electric  charge
between  the  two  points. Potential  difference  is  measured  in
volts

(1 V = 1 J(cid:2)C)
The  change  in  potential  energy  when  a  charge  q moves

and is often referred to as voltage.

through a potential difference
¢pe = qVba .

is

(17;3)

Vba

The potential difference

Vba

between two points a and b

where a uniform electric field E exists is given by

Vba = –Ed,
where d is the distance between the two points.

(17;4a)

An equipotential line or surface is all at the same poten-

tial, and is perpendicular to the electric field at all points.

The electric potential at a position P due to a single point

charge Q, relative to zero potential at infinity, is given by

V =

kQ
r

,

(17;5)

where r is the distance from Q to position P and k = 1(cid:2)4p(cid:4)

0 .
Summary 493

*
[ The potential due to an electric dipole drops off as

p = Ql,
The dipole moment is
the two equal but opposite charges of magnitude Q.]

l
where

1(cid:2)r2.
is the distance between

A capacitor is a device used to store charge (and electric
energy), and consists of two nontouching conductors. The two
conductors hold equal and opposite charges, of magnitude Q.
The ratio of this charge Q to the potential difference V between
the conductors is called the capacitance, C:

C =

Q

V ,  or  Q = CV.

(17;7)

The capacitance of a parallel-plate capacitor is proportional
to the area A of each plate and inversely proportional to their
separation d:

C = (cid:4)

0

.

(17;8)

A
d

The  space  between  the  two  conductors  of  a  capacitor
contains a nonconducting material such as air, paper, or plastic.
These materials are referred to as dielectrics, and the capaci-
tance  is  proportional  to  a  property  of  dielectrics  called  the
dielectric constant, K (equal to 1 for air).

A charged capacitor stores an amount of electric energy

given by

pe = 1

2 QV = 1

2 CV2 = 1

2

Q2
C

.

(17;10)

This  energy  can  be  thought  of  as  stored  in  the  electric  field
between the plates.

Questions

1. If two points are at the same potential, does this mean that
no net work is done in moving a test charge from one point to
the other? Does this imply that no force must be exerted?
Explain.

2. If a negative charge is initially at rest in an electric field,
will it move toward a region of higher potential or lower
potential? What  about  a  positive  charge? How  does  the
potential  energy  of  the  charge  change  in  each  instance?
Explain.

3. State clearly the difference (a) between electric potential
and electric field, (b) between electric potential and elec-
tric potential energy.

4. An electron is accelerated from rest by a potential differ-
ence  of  0.20 V. How  much  greater  would  its  final  speed
be  if  it  is  accelerated  with  four  times  as  much  voltage?
Explain.

5. Is  there  a  point  along  the  line  joining  two  equal  positive
charges where the electric field is zero? Where the electric
potential is zero? Explain.

6. Can  a  particle  ever  move  from  a  region  of  low  electric
potential to one of high potential and yet have its electric
potential energy decrease? Explain.

7. If

V = 0
point, must
for each.

at a point in space, must

at some
at that point? Explain. Give examples

If

V = 0

B = 0?
E

B = 0
E

8. Can two equipotential lines cross? Explain.
9. Draw in a few equipotential lines in Fig. 16–32b and c.
10. When  a  battery  is  connected  to  a  capacitor, why  do  the
two  plates  acquire  charges  of  the  same  magnitude? Will
this be true if the two plates are different sizes or shapes?

494 CHAPTER 17 Electric Potential

The energy stored in any electric field E has a density

electric pe
volume

= 1
2

(cid:4)

0

E2.

(17;11)

Digital electronics converts an analog signal voltage into
an approximate digital voltage based on a binary code: each bit
has  two  possibilities, 1  or  0  (also “on” or “off”). The  binary
28 = 256
number 1101 equals 13. A byte is 8 bits and provides
voltage levels. Sampling rate is the number of voltage measure-
ments done on the analog signal per second. The bit depth is
the number of digital voltage levels available at each sampling.
CDs are 44.1 kHz, 16-bit.

[ TV and computer monitors traditionally used a cathode ray
*
tube (CRT)  which  accelerates  electrons  by  high  voltage, and
sweeps them across the screen in a regular way using magnetic
coils  or  electric  deflection  plates. LCD  flat  screens contain
millions of pixels, each with a red, green, and blue subpixel whose
1
 s
via a matrix of horizontal and
brightness is addressed every
60
vertical wires using a digital (binary) code.]

*
[ An  electrocardiogram (ECG  or  EKG)  records  the
potential  changes  of  each  heart  beat  as  the  cells  depolarize
and repolarize.]

11. A conducting sphere carries a charge Q and a second iden-
tical conducting sphere is neutral. The two are initially isolated,
but then they are placed in contact. (a) What can you say
about the potential of each when they are in contact? (b) Will
charge flow from one to the other? If so, how much?
12. The parallel plates of an isolated capacitor carry opposite
charges, Q. If the separation of the plates is increased, is a
force required to do so? Is the potential difference changed?
What happens to the work done in the pulling process?

13. If the electric field

is uniform in a region, what can you
infer  about  the  electric  potential  V? If  V is  uniform  in  a
region of space, what can you infer about

B
E

?

B
E

14. Is the electric potential energy of two isolated unlike charges
positive or negative? What about two like charges? What is the
significance of the sign of the potential energy in each case?
15. If the voltage across a fixed capacitor is doubled, the amount
of energy it stores (a) doubles; (b) is halved; (c) is quadrupled;
(d) is unaffected; (e) none of these. Explain.

16. How does the energy stored in a capacitor change when a
dielectric  is  inserted  if  (a)  the  capacitor  is  isolated  so  Q
does  not  change; (b)  the  capacitor  remains  connected  to
a battery so V does not change? Explain.

17. A  dielectric  is  pulled  out  from  between  the  plates  of  a
capacitor  which  remains  connected  to  a  battery. What
changes occur to (a) the capacitance, (b) the charge on the
plates, (c)  the  potential  difference, (d)  the  energy  stored
in  the  capacitor, and  (e)  the  electric  field? Explain  your
answers.

18. We have seen that the capacitance C depends on the size
and  position  of  the  two  conductors, as  well  as  on  the
dielectric  constant  K. What  then  did  we  mean  when  we
said that C is a constant in Eq. 17–7?

7. When the proton and electron in MisConceptual Question 6
strike the opposite plate, which one has more kinetic energy?
(a) The proton.
(b) The electron.
(c) Both acquire the same kinetic energy.
(d) Neither—there is no change in kinetic energy.
(e) They both acquire the same kinetic energy but with

opposite signs.

8. Which of the following do not affect capacitance?

(a) Area of the plates.
(b) Separation of the plates.
(c) Material between the plates.
(d) Charge on the plates.
(e) Energy stored in the capacitor.

9. A battery establishes a voltage V on a parallel-plate capaci-
tor. After the battery is disconnected, the distance between
the plates is doubled without loss of charge. Accordingly,
the  capacitance  _________  and  the  voltage  between  the
plates _________.
(a) increases; decreases.
(b) decreases; increases.
(c) increases; increases.
(d) decreases; decreases.
(e) stays the same; stays the same.

10. Which of the following is a vector?

(a) Electric potential.
(b) Electric potential energy.
(c) Electric field.
(d) Equipotential lines.
(e) Capacitance.

11. A

±0.2 mC

charge is in an electric field. What happens if

that charge is replaced by a
(a) The electric potential changes sign, but the electric

charge?

–0.2 mC

potential energy stays the same.

(b) The electric potential stays the same, but the electric

potential energy changes sign.

(c) Both the electric potential and electric potential

energy change sign.

(d) Both the electric potential and electric potential

energy stay the same.

MisConceptual Questions

1. A

±0.2 mC

charge is in an electric field. What happens if

that charge is replaced by a
(a) The electric potential doubles, but the electric potential

charge?

±0.4 mC

energy stays the same.

(b) The electric potential stays the same, but the electric

potential energy doubles.

(c) Both the electric potential and electric potential

energy double.

(d) Both the electric potential and electric potential

energy stay the same.

2. Two identical positive charges are placed near each other.

At the point halfway between the two charges,
(a) the electric field is zero and the potential is positive.
(b) the electric field is zero and the potential is zero.
(c) the electric field is not zero and the potential is positive.
(d) the electric field is not zero and the potential is zero.
(e) None of these statements is true.

3. Four  identical  point  charges  are  arranged  at  the  corners
of a square [Hint: Draw a figure]. The electric field E and
potential V at the center of the square are
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)

E = 0,  V = 0.
E = 0,  V Z 0.
E Z 0,  V Z 0.
E Z 0,  V = 0.
E = V

regardless of the value.

4. Which of the following statements is valid?

(a) If the potential at a particular point is zero, the field at

that point must be zero.

(b) If the field at a particular point is zero, the potential at

that point must be zero.

(c) If the field throughout a particular region is constant,
the potential throughout that region must be zero.

(d) If the potential throughout a particular region is

constant, the field throughout that region must be zero.

±q

5. If  it  takes  an  amount  of  work  W to  move  two

point
charges from infinity to a distance d apart from each other,
then how much work should it take to move three
point
charges from infinity to a distance d apart from each other?
(a) 2W.
(b) 3W.
(c) 4W.
(d) 6W.

±q

6. A  proton

(Q = ±e)

(Q = –e)

are  in  a
and  an  electron
constant electric field created by oppositely charged plates.
You release the proton from near the positive plate and the
electron from near the negative plate. Which feels the larger
electric force?
(a) The proton.
(b) The electron.
(c) Neither—there is no force.
(d) The magnitude of the force is the same for both and in

the same direction.

(e) The magnitude of the force is the same for both but in

opposite directions.

MisConceptual Questions

495

For assigned homework and other learning materials, go to the MasteringPhysics website.

Problems

17–1 to 17–4 Electric Potential

1. (I) How much work does the electric field do in moving a
charge from ground to a point whose potential is

–7.7 mC
±65 V

higher?

2. (I) How much work does the electric field do in moving a
to a point at
Express  your  answer  both  in  joules  and  electron

proton from a point at a potential of
–45 V?
volts.

±125 V

3. (I) What potential difference is needed to stop an electron

that has an initial velocity

v = 6.0 * 105 m(cid:2)s?

4. (I) How much kinetic energy will an electron gain (in joules
and eV) if it accelerates through a potential difference of
18,500 V?

5. (I) An  electron  acquires

of  kinetic  energy
when it is accelerated by an electric field from plate A to
plate B. What is the potential difference between the plates,
and which plate is at the higher potential?

6.45 * 10–16 J

6. (I)  How  strong  is  the  electric  field  between  two  parallel
plates  6.8 mm  apart  if  the  potential  difference  between
them is 220 V?

7. (I)  An  electric  field  of  525

is  desired  between  two
parallel plates 11.0 mm apart. How large a voltage should
be applied?

V(cid:2)m

8. (I) The electric field between two parallel plates connected
How  far  apart  are  the

V(cid:2)m.

to  a  45-V  battery  is  1900
plates?

9. (I) What  potential  difference  is  needed  to  give  a  helium

nucleus

(Q = 2e)

85.0 keV of kinetic energy?

10. (II) Two parallel plates, connected to a 45-V power supply,
are separated by an air gap. How small can the gap be if the
air is not to become conducting by exceeding its breakdown
value of

E = 3 * 106 V(cid:2)m?

11. (II) The work done by an external force to move a

–6.50 mC
If the charge
charge from point A to point B is
was started from rest and had
of kinetic energy
when  it  reached  point  B, what  must  be  the  potential  dif-
ference between A and B?

15.0 * 10–4 J.

4.82 * 10–4 J

12. (II) What  is  the  speed  of  an  electron  with  kinetic  energy

(a) 850 eV, and (b) 0.50 keV?

13. (II) What is the speed of a proton whose ke is 4.2 keV?

14. (II) An alpha particle (which is a helium nucleus,

Q = ±2e,
) is emitted in a radioactive decay with

m = 6.64 * 10–27 kg
ke = 5.53 MeV.

What is its speed?

3 * 106 V(cid:2)m

15. (II) An electric field greater than about

causes
air to break down (electrons are removed from the atoms
and then recombine, emitting light). See Section 17–2 and
Table 17–3. If you shuffle along a carpet and then reach for
a doorknob, a spark flies across a gap you estimate to be
1 mm between your finger and the doorknob. Estimate the
voltage between your finger and the doorknob. Why is no
harm done?

496 CHAPTER 17 Electric Potential

16. (II) An electron starting from rest acquires 4.8 keV of KE
in moving from point A to point B. (a) How much KE would
a  proton  acquire, starting  from  rest  at  B  and  moving  to
point A? (b) Determine the ratio of their speeds at the end
of their respective trajectories.

17. (II)  Draw  a  conductor  in  the  oblong  shape  of  a  football.
Draw in

This conductor carries a net negative charge,
a dozen or so electric field lines and equipotential lines.

–Q.

17–5 Potential Due to Point Charges
[Let

V = 0

x = q

at

.]

18. (I) What  is  the  electric  potential  15.0 cm  from  a

3.00 mC

point charge?

19. (I) A point charge Q creates an electric potential of

±165 V

at a distance of 15 cm. What is Q?

±35 mC

±35 mC

point charge is placed 46 cm from an identi-
charge. How much work would be required to
test charge from a point midway between

20. (II) A
cal
move a
them to a point 12 cm closer to either of the charges?
2.5 * 10–15 m

21. (II) (a) What is the electric potential

±0.50 mC

(charge ±e)?

from a proton
energy of a system that consists of two protons
apart—as might occur inside a typical nucleus?

away
(b) What is the electric potential
2.5 * 10–15 m

22. (II) Three point charges are arranged at the corners of a
square of side  as shown in Fig. 17–39. What is the poten-
tial at the fourth corner (point A)?

l

l

+Q

l

−2Q

l

A

FIGURE 17–39
Problem 22.

+3Q

l

23. (II) An electron starts from rest 24.5 cm from a fixed point
How  fast  will  the  electron

Q = –6.50 nC.

charge  with
be moving when it is very far away?

±9.5 mC

24. (II)  Two  identical

point  charges  are  initially
5.3 cm  from  each  other. If  they  are  released  at  the  same
instant from rest, how fast will each be moving when they
are  very  far  away  from  each  other? Assume  they  have
identical masses of 1.0 mg.

25. (II)  Two  point  charges,

3.0 mC
are  placed
4.0 cm apart on the x axis. At what points along the x axis
is (a) the electric field zero and (b) the potential zero?

–2.0 mC,

and

26. (II) How much work must be done to bring three electrons
from  one

from  a  great  distance  apart  to
another (at the corners of an equilateral triangle)?

1.0 * 10–10 m

27. (II) Point a is 62 cm north of a

point charge, and
point b is 88 cm west of the charge (Fig. 17–40). Determine
(a)

(magnitude and direction).

Vb - Va

and (b)

- E

B
E

B

b

a

–3.8 mC

a

62 cm

FIGURE 17–40
Problem 27.

b

88 cm

Q = –3.8 mC

28. (II) Many chemical reactions release energy. Suppose that
at the beginning of a reaction, an electron and proton are
separated by 0.110 nm, and their final separation is 0.100 nm.
How much electric potential energy was lost in this reaction
(in units of eV)?

1.2 * 10–15 m

29. (III) How much voltage must be used to accelerate a proton
(radius
) so that it has sufficient energy to just
“touch” a silicon nucleus? A silicon nucleus has a charge of
±14e,
Assume  the
potential is that for point charges.

and  its  radius  is  about

3.6 * 10–15 m.

30. (III) Two  equal  but  opposite  charges  are  separated  by  a
distance d, as  shown  in  Fig. 17–41. Determine  a  formula
for points B and A on the line between
for
the charges situated as shown.

VBA = VB - VA

FIGURE 17–41
Problem 30.

b

+q

A

b

−q

B

d

31. (III) In the Bohr model of the hydrogen atom, an electron
orbits  a  proton  (the  nucleus)  in  a  circular  orbit  of  radius
0.53 * 10–10 m.
(a)  What  is  the  electric  potential  at  the
electron’s orbit due to the proton? (b) What is the kinetic
energy of the electron? (c) What is the total energy of the
electron  in  its  orbit? (d) What  is  the  ionization  energy—
that is, the energy required to remove the electron from the
at rest? Express the results of
atom and take it to
parts (b), (c), and (d) in joules and eV.

r = q,

*17–6 Electric Dipoles
*32. (I)  An  electron  and  a  proton  are

0.53 * 10–10 m

apart.

What is their dipole moment if they are at rest?

at a point

*33. (II) Calculate the electric potential due to a dipole whose
4.2 * 10–30 C(cid:2)m
2.4 * 10–9 m
dipole moment is
away if this point is (a) along the axis of the dipole nearer the
positive charge; (b) 45° above the axis but nearer the positive
charge; (c) 45° above the axis but nearer the negative charge.
*34. (III) The dipole moment, considered as a vector, points from
the  negative  to  the  positive  charge. The  water  molecule,
Fig. 17–42, has a dipole moment  which can be considered
as the vector sum of the two dipole moments,
as
shown. The distance between each H and the O is about
0.96 * 10–10 m.
The lines joining the center of the O atom
with each H atom make an angle of 104°, as shown, and the
net dipole moment has been mea-
p = 6.1 * 10–30 C(cid:2)m.
sured to be
Determine  the  charge  q on  each
H atom.

pB
and
2 ,

pB
1

p1

(cid:2)

pB

B

H

pB

104°

(cid:3)
O
(cid:3)

H

(cid:2)

B

p2

FIGURE 17–42 Problem 34.
A water molecule, H2O.

17–7 Capacitance
35. (I)  The  two  plates  of  a  capacitor  hold

and
of charge, respectively, when the potential dif-

–2500 mC
ference is 960 V. What is the capacitance?

±2500 mC

36. (I) An 8500-pF capacitor holds plus and minus charges of

16.5 * 10–8 C.

What is the voltage across the capacitor?

37. (I) How much charge flows from each terminal of a 12.0-V

battery when it is connected to a

5.00-mF

capacitor?

38. (I) A 0.20-F capacitor is desired. What area must the plates
have if they are to be separated by a 3.2-mm air gap?

39. (II) The charge on a capacitor increases by

when the
voltage across it increases from 97 V to 121 V. What is the
capacitance of the capacitor?

15 mC

40. (II) An electric field of

two parallel plates, each of area
2.45 mm of air. What charge must be on each plate?

8.50 * 105 V(cid:2)m
45.0 cm2

is desired between
and separated by

41. (II) If a capacitor has opposite
and an electric field of 2.0
plates, what must each plate’s area be?

kV(cid:2)mm

4.2 mC

charges on the plates,
is desired between the

42. (II) It takes 18 J of energy to move a 0.30-mC charge from
capacitor  to  the  other. How  much

15-mF

one  plate  of  a
charge is on each plate?

43. (II) To get an idea how big a farad is, suppose you want to
make  a  1-F  air-filled  parallel-plate  capacitor  for  a  circuit
you are building. To make it a reasonable size, suppose you
1.0 cm2.
limit the plate area to
What would the gap have to
be between the plates? Is this practically achievable?
44. (II) How strong is the electric field between the plates of a
air-gap capacitor if they are 2.0 mm apart and each

0.80-mF
has a charge of
2.50-mF

45. (III) A

62 mC?
capacitor is charged to 746 V and a

6.80-mF
capacitor is charged to 562 V. These capacitors are then dis-
connected from their batteries. Next the positive plates are
connected to each other and the negative plates are connected
to each other. What will be the potential difference across
each and the charge on each? [Hint: Charge is conserved.]
capacitor  is  charged  by  a  165-V  battery
(Fig. 17–43a)  and  then  is  disconnected  from  the  battery.
is then connected (Fig. 17–43b) to
When this capacitor
a second (initially uncharged)
capacitor,
the final voltage
on  each  capacitor  is  15 V.
C
What  is  the  value  of
2 ?
[Hint: Charge is conserved.]

7.7-mF

AC
1

C1

C1

2 ,

C

B

46. (III)  A

FIGURE 17–43
Problems 46 and 58.

V

(a)

C2
(b)

17–8 Dielectrics

47. (I) What  is  the  capacitance  of  two  square  parallel  plates
6.6 cm on a side that are separated by 1.8 mm of paraffin?
48. (I) What is the capacitance of a pair of circular plates with

a radius of 5.0 cm separated by 2.8 mm of mica?

49. (II) An uncharged capacitor is connected to a 21.0-V battery
until it is fully charged, after which it is disconnected from
the battery. A slab of paraffin is then inserted between the
plates. What will now be the voltage between the plates?
50. (II)  A  3500-pF  air-gap  capacitor  is  connected  to  a  32-V
battery. If  a  piece  of  mica  is  placed  between  the  plates,
how much charge will flow from the battery?

51. (II) The electric field between the plates of a paper-separated
(K = 3.75)
The  plates  are
capacitor  is
1.95 mm apart, and the charge on each is
Determine
the capacitance of this capacitor and the area of each plate.

8.24 * 104 V(cid:2)m.

0.675 mC.

Problems

497

17–9 Electric Energy Storage

52. (I)  650 V  is  applied  to  a  2800-pF  capacitor. How  much

energy is stored?

53. (I) A cardiac defibrillator is used to shock a heart that is
beating erratically. A capacitor in this device is charged to
5.0 kV and stores 1200 J of energy. What is its capacitance?

54. (II)  How  much  energy  is  stored  by  the  electric  field
between two square plates, 8.0 cm on a side, separated by a
1.5-mm air gap? The charges on the plates are equal and
opposite and of magnitude

370 mC.

55. (II) A homemade capacitor is assembled by placing two 9-in.
pie pans 4 cm apart and connecting them to the opposite ter-
minals of a 9-V battery. Estimate (a) the capacitance, (b) the
charge on each plate, (c) the electric field halfway between the
plates, and (d) the work done by the battery to charge them.
(e) Which of the above values change if a dielectric is inserted?
–Q.
The  separation  of  the  plates  is  then  halved. (a)  By  what
factor does the energy stored in the electric field change?
(b) How much work must be done to reduce the plate sepa-
ration from d to

56. (II) A parallel-plate capacitor has fixed charges

The area of each plate is A.

and

±Q

d?

1
2

57. (II) There is an electric field near the Earth’s surface whose
V(cid:2)m.
How much energy is stored
magnitude is about 150
per cubic meter in this field?

62. (II)  Consider  a  rather  coarse  4-bit  analog-to-digital
conversion where the maximum voltage is 5.0 V. (a) What
voltage does 1011 represent? (b) What is the 4-bit repre-
sentation for 2.0 V?

63. (II) (a) 16-bit sampling provides how many different pos-
sible  voltages? (b)  24-bit  sampling  provides  how  many
different possible voltages? (c) For color TV, 3 subpixels,
each 8 bits, provides a total of how many different colors?
64. (II) A few extraterrestrials arrived. They had two hands, but
claimed that
. How many fingers did they have
on their two hands? Note that our decimal system (and ten
characters: 0, 1, 2,
, 9) surely has its origin because we
have ten fingers. [Hint: 11 is in their system. In our decimal
system, the result would be written as 5.]

3 + 2 = 11

p

*17–11 TV and Computer Monitors
*65. (II)  Figure  17–44  is  a  photograph  of  a  computer  screen
During
shot  by  a  camera  set  at  an  exposure  time  of
the exposure the cursor arrow was moved around by the
mouse, and we see it 15 times. (a) Explain why we see the
cursor 15 times.
(b) What  is  the
refresh  rate  of
the screen?

 s.

1
4

58. (III) A

3.70-mF

capacitor is charged by a 12.0-V battery. It
is disconnected from the battery and then connected to an
capacitor (Fig. 17–43). Determine the total
uncharged
stored energy (a) before the two capacitors are connected, and
(b) after they are connected. (c) What is the change in energy?

5.00-mF

17–10 Digital

59. (I) Write the decimal number 116 in binary.

60. (I)  Write  the  binary  number  01010101  as  a  decimal

number.

61. (I) Write the binary number 1010101010101010 as a decimal

number.

General Problems

68. A  lightning  flash  transfers  4.0 C  of  charge  and  5.2 MJ  of
energy to the Earth. (a) Across what potential difference did
it travel? (b) How much water could this boil and vaporize,
starting from room temperature? (See also Chapter 14.)
69. In  an  older  television  tube, electrons  are  accelerated  by
thousands of volts through a vacuum. If a television set were
laid on its back, would electrons be able to move upward
against  the  force  of  gravity? What  potential  difference,
acting over a distance of 2.4 cm, would be needed to balance
the  downward  force  of  gravity  so  that  an  electron  would
remain stationary? Assume that the electric field is uniform.
70. How does the energy stored in a capacitor change, as the
capacitor remains connected to a battery, if the separation
of the plates is doubled?

71. How does the energy stored in an isolated capacitor change
if (a) the potential difference is doubled, or (b) the separa-
tion of the plates is doubled?

72. A huge 4.0-F capacitor has enough stored energy to heat
2.8 kg  of  water  from  21°C  to  95°C. What  is  the  potential
difference across the plates?

498 CHAPTER 17 Electric Potential

FIGURE 17–44
Problem 65.

*66. (III)  In  a  given  CRT, electrons  are  accelerated  horizon-
tally by 9.0 kV. They then pass through a uniform electric
field E for a distance of 2.8 cm, which deflects them upward
so they travel 22 cm to the top of the screen, 11 cm above
the center. Estimate the value of E.

*67. (III) Electrons are accelerated by 6.0 kV in a CRT. The screen
is 30 cm wide and is 34 cm from the 2.6-cm-long deflection
plates. Over  what  range  must  the  horizontally  deflecting
electric field vary to sweep the beam fully across the screen?

(q = ±e)

73. A proton

are
accelerated by the same voltage V. Which gains the greater
kinetic energy, and by what factor?

and an alpha particle

(q = ±2e)

74. Dry  air  will  break  down  if  the  electric  field  exceeds
What amount of charge can be placed on a
65 cm2?
75. Three charges are at the corners of an equilateral triangle

3.0 * 106 V(cid:2)m.
parallel-plate capacitor if the area of each plate is

l

(side  )  as  shown  in  Fig. 17–45.
Determine  the  potential  at  the
midpoint of each of the sides. Let
V = 0

at r = q.

y

–Q

l

+Q

FIGURE 17–45
Problem 75.

l

l

–3Q

x

76. It  takes  15.2 J  of  energy  to  move  a  13.0-mC  charge  from
capacitor to the other. How much

one plate of a
charge is on each plate? Assume constant voltage.

17.0-mF

77. A

3.4 mC

–2.6 mC

and a

charge are placed 2.5 cm apart. At
what points along the line joining them is (a) the electric
field zero, and (b) the electric potential zero?

V(cid:2)m
m = 0.670 kg

78. Near the surface of the Earth there is an electric field of
about 150
which points downward. Two identical balls
are dropped from a height of 2.00 m,
with mass
= 650 mC,
q
but one of the balls is positively charged with
1
q
= –650 mC.
and the second is negatively charged with
2
Use conservation of energy to determine the difference in
the speed of the two balls when they hit the ground. (Neglect
air resistance.)

79. The  power  supply  for  a  pulsed  nitrogen  laser  has  a
0.050-mF
capacitor  with  a  maximum  voltage  rating  of
35 kV. (a) Estimate how much energy could be stored in
this capacitor. (b) If 12% of this stored electrical energy is
converted to light energy in a pulse that is 6.2 microseconds
long, what is the power of the laser pulse?

80. In  a  photocell, ultraviolet  (UV)  light  provides  enough
energy  to  some  electrons  in  barium  metal  to  eject  them
from the surface at high speed. To measure the maximum
energy  of  the  electrons, another  plate  above  the  barium
surface is kept at a negative enough potential that the emitted
electrons are slowed down and stopped, and return to the
–3.02 V
barium surface. See Fig. 17–46. If the plate voltage is
(compared  to  the  barium)  when  the  fastest  electrons  are
stopped, what was the speed of these electrons when they
were emitted?

Plate

UV
light

–

+

V = −3.02 V

–

Barium

V = 0

FIGURE 17–46
Problem 80.

81. A

±38 mC

point charge is placed 36 cm from an identical
±38 mC
charge is moved from point A
to  point  B  as  shown  in  Fig. 17–47. What  is  the  change in
potential energy?

charge. A

–1.5 mC

B

FIGURE 17–47
Problem 81.

38 mC

14 cm

12 cm

24 cm

A

38 mC

K = 3.7

82. Paper  has  a  dielectric  constant

15 * 106 V(cid:2)m.

and  a  dielectric
strength of
Suppose that a typical sheet of
paper has a thickness of 0.11 mm. You make a “homemade”
capacitor by placing a sheet of
paper between
two  aluminum  foil  sheets  (Fig. 17–48)  of  the  same  size.
C
(a) What  is  the  capacitance
of your  device? (b) About
how much charge could you store on your capacitor before
it would break down?

21 * 14 cm

Paper

Aluminum

FIGURE 17–48
Problem 82.

Aluminum

83. A capacitor is made from two 1.1-cm-diameter coins sepa-
rated by a 0.10-mm-thick piece of paper
A 12-V
battery is connected to the capacitor. How much charge is
on each coin?

(K = 3.7).

84. A

±3.5 mC

charge is 23 cm to the right of a

charge.
At the midpoint between the two charges, (a) determine the
potential and (b) the electric field.

–7.2 mC

3.0 cm2

85. A parallel-plate capacitor with plate area

and air-
gap separation 0.50 mm is connected to a 12-V battery, and
fully charged. The battery is then disconnected. (a) What is
the charge on the capacitor? (b) The plates are now pulled
to  a  separation  of  0.75 mm. What  is  the  charge  on  the
capacitor now? (c) What is the potential difference between
the plates now? (d) How much work was required to pull
the plates to their new separation?

86. A

2.1-mF

capacitor is fully charged by a 6.0-V battery. The
battery is then disconnected. The capacitor is not ideal and
the charge slowly leaks out from the plates. The next day,
the capacitor has lost half its stored energy. Calculate the
amount of charge lost.

87. Two point charges are fixed 4.0 cm apart from each other.
Their charges are
and their masses are
= 1.5 mg
m
Q
is released from
and
rest, what will be its speed after a very long time? (b) If
both charges are released from rest at the same time, what
will be the speed of

= Q
2
= 2.5 mg.

after a very long time?

= 6.5 mC,

(a) If

Q
1
m

1

1

2

Q
1

88. Two  charges  are  placed  as  shown  in  Fig. 17–49  with
= –3.3 mC.
Find the potential differ-

= 1.2 mC

q
and
1
ence between points A and B.

q
2

q1

0.10 m

q2

A

B

0.10 m

FIGURE 17–49
Problem 88.

89. If the electrons in a single raindrop, 3.5 mm in diameter, could
be removed from the Earth (without removing the atomic
nuclei), by  how  much  would  the  potential  of  the  Earth
increase?

3 * 106 V(cid:2)m

90. Thunderclouds may develop a voltage difference of about
5 * 107 V.
is
Given that an electric field of
required to produce an electrical spark within a volume of
air, estimate  the  length  of  a  thundercloud  lightning  bolt.
[Can you see why, when lightning strikes from a cloud to the
ground, the bolt has to propagate as a sequence of steps?]
91. A manufacturer claims that a carpet will not generate more
than 6.0 kV of static electricity. What magnitude of charge
would have to be transferred between a carpet and a shoe
for there to be a 6.0-kV potential difference between the
shoe and the carpet? Approximate the area of the shoe and
assume  the  shoe  and  carpet  are  large  sheets  of  charge
separated by a small distance

d = 1.0 mm.

92. Compact “ultracapacitors” with  capacitance  values  up  to
several  thousand  farads  are  now  commercially  available.
One application for ultracapacitors is in providing power for
electrical circuits when other sources (such as a battery) are
turned off. To get an idea of how much charge can be stored
in  such  a  component, assume  a  1200-F  ultracapacitor  is
initially charged to 12.0 V by a battery and is then discon-
nected from the battery. If charge is then drawn off the plates
of  this  capacitor  at  a  rate  of
say, to  power  the
backup memory of some electrical device, how long (in days)
will it take for the potential difference across this capacitor
to drop to 6.0 V?

1.0 mC(cid:2)s,

General Problems

499

93. An electron is accelerated horizontally from rest by a poten-
tial  difference  of  2200 V. It  then  passes  between  two
horizontal plates 6.5 cm long and 1.3 cm apart that have a
u
potential difference of 250 V (Fig. 17–50). At what angle
will  the  electron  be  traveling  after  it  passes  between  the
plates?

+ + + + + + + +

θ

vB

FIGURE 17–50
Problem 93.

− − − − − − − −

A1 fF = 10–15 FB

94. In  the  dynamic  random  access  memory  (DRAM) of  a
computer, each  memory  cell  contains  a  capacitor  for
charge storage. Each of these cells represents a single binary-
bit value of “1” when its 35-fF capacitor
is
charged at 1.5 V, or “0” when uncharged at 0 V. (a) When
fully  charged, how  many  excess  electrons  are  on  a  cell
capacitor’s negative plate? (b) After charge has been placed
on a cell capacitor’s plate, it slowly “leaks” off at a rate of
about
How long  does  it  take  for  the  potential
difference across this capacitor to decrease by 2.0% from
its fully charged value? (Because of this leakage effect, the
charge  on  a  DRAM  capacitor  is “refreshed” many  times
per second.) Note: A DRAM cell is shown in Fig. 21–29.

0.30 fC(cid:2)s.

Search and Learn

1. Make a list of rules for and properties of equipotential sur-
faces or lines. You should be able to find eight distinct rules
in the text.

2. Figure  17–8  shows  contour  lines  (elevations). Just  for  fun,
assume they are equipotential lines on a flat 2-dimensional
surface with the values shown being in volts. Estimate the
magnitude and direction of the “electric field” (a) between
Iceberg Lake and Cecile Lake and (b) at the Minaret Mine.
Assume that up is
and that Cecile Lake is
about 1.0 km wide in the middle.

right is

±x,

±y,

110 km2.

3. In  lightning  storms, the  potential  difference  between  the
Earth and the bottom of thunderclouds may be 35,000,000 V.
The bottoms of the thunderclouds are typically 1500 m above
the Earth, and can have an area of
Modeling the
Earth–cloud  system  as  a  huge  capacitor, calculate  (a)  the
capacitance of the Earth–cloud system, (b) the charge stored
in the “capacitor,” and (c) the energy stored in the “capacitor.”
4. The potential energy stored in a capacitor (Section 17–9) can
be  written  as  either
In  the  first  case  the
or
energy is proportional to C; in the second case the energy is
proportional to 1 C. (a) Explain how both of these equations
can be correct. (b) When might you use the first equation
and when might you use the second equation? (c) If a paper
dielectric  is  inserted  into  a  parallel-plate  capacitor  that  is
attached  to  a  battery  (V does  not  change), by  what  factor
will  the  energy  stored  in  the  capacitor  change? (d)  If  a
quartz  dielectric  is  inserted  into  a  charged  parallel-plate
capacitor that is isolated from any battery, by what factor will
the energy stored in the capacitor change?

Q2(cid:2)2C.

CV2(cid:2)2

(cid:2)

95. In the DRAM computer chip of Problem 94, suppose the
two  parallel  plates  of  one  cell’s  35-fF  capacitor  are
separated by a 2.0-nm-thick insulating material with dielectric
of
constant
the cell capacitor’s plates. (b) If the plate area A accounts
for half of the area of each cell, estimate how many mega-
bytes  of  memory  can  be  placed  on  a
silicon
wafer.

(a)  Determine  the  area  A

(1 byte = 8 bits.)

K = 25.

Ain mm2B

3.0-cm2

96. A parallel-plate capacitor with plate area

A = 2.0 m2

d = 3.0 mm

and
plate separation
is connected to a 35-V battery
(Fig. 17–51a). (a) Determine the charge on the capacitor, the
electric  field, the  capacitance, and  the  energy  stored  in
the capacitor. (b) With the capacitor still connected to the
K = 3.2
battery, a  slab  of  plastic  with  dielectric  strength
is placed between the plates of the capacitor, so that the gap is
completely filled with the dielectric (Fig. 17–51b). What are
the new values of charge,
electric field, capacitance,
and the energy stored in
the capacitor?

d = 3.0 mm

A = 2.0 m2

35 V

(a)

FIGURE 17–51
Problem 96.

35 V

(b)

K = 3.2

3.0 mm

5. Suppose it takes 75 kW of power for your car to travel at a
constant  speed  on  the  highway. (a) What  is  this  in  horse-
power? (b)  How  much  energy  in  joules  would  it  take  for
your car to travel at highway speed for 5.0 hours? (c) Suppose
this amount of energy is to be stored in the electric field of a
parallel-plate capacitor (Section 17–9). If the voltage on the
capacitor is to be 850 V, what is the required capacitance?
(d) If this capacitor were to be made from activated carbon
(Section  17–7), the  voltage  would  be  limited  to  no  more
than 10 V. In this case, how many grams of activated carbon
would be required? (e) Is this practical?

6. Capacitors can be used as “electric charge counters.” Con-
sider an initially uncharged capacitor of capacitance C with
its bottom plate grounded and its top plate connected to a
source of electrons. (a) If N electrons flow onto the capacitor’s
top plate, show that the resulting potential difference V across
the capacitor is directly proportional to N. (b) Assume the
voltage-measuring  device  can  accurately  resolve  voltage
changes of about 1 mV. What value of C would be necessary
to  resolve  the  arrival  of  an  individual  electron? (c)  Using
modern semiconductor technology, a micron-size capacitor
can be constructed with parallel conducting plates separated
by an insulator of dielectric constant
and thickness
d = 100 nm.
should  the  square  plates
(in mm)
have

What  side  length
?

K = 3

l

A N S W E R S   T O   E X E R C I S E S

(b)

9.8 * 105 m(cid:2)s.

–8.0 * 10–16 J;

A: (a)
B: (c).
C: 0.72 J.
D: (c).

500 CHAPTER 17 Electric Potential

E: A.
F: (a) 3 times greater; (b) 3 times greater.
G: 12 mF.
