Sample Problem 32.04
Magnetic dipole moment of a compass needle
A compass needle made of pure iron (density 7900 kg/m3)
has a length L of 3.0 cm, a width of 1.0 mm, and a thickness
of 0.50 mm. The magnitude of the magnetic dipole moment
of an iron atom is mFe ! 2.1 & 10'23 J/T. If the magnetiza-
tion of the needle is equivalent to the alignment of 10% of
the atoms in the needle, what is the magnitude of the nee-
dle’s magnetic dipole moment ?
KEY IDEAS
(1) Alignment of all N atoms in the needle would give a
magnitude of NmFe for the needle’s magnetic dipole mo-
ment . However, the needle has only 10% alignment (the
random orientation of the rest does not give any net contri-
bution to ).Thus,
m ! 0.10NmFe.
(32-42)
(2) We can find the number of atoms N in the needle from
the needle’s mass:
.
(32-43)
Finding N: Iron’s atomic mass is not listed in Appendix F,
but its molar mass M is.Thus, we write
(32-44)
iron’s atomic mass !
iron’s molar mass M
Avogadro’s number NA
.
N !
needle’s mass
iron’s atomic mass
m
:
m
:
m
:
Additional examples, video, and practice available at WileyPLUS
-
(Eq. 32-4), gives the magnetic field generated by a
current ienc encircled by a closed loop. Maxwell’s law and Ampere’s
law can be written as the single equation
(Ampere-Maxwell law). (32-5)
Displacement Current
We define the fictitious displacement
current due to a changing electric field as
(32-10)
Equation 32-5 then becomes
(Ampere-Maxwell law),
(32-11)
where id,enc is the displacement current encircled by the integration
, B
: ! ds
: ! m0id,enc $ m0ienc
id ! ´0
d#E
dt .
, B
: ! ds
: ! m0´0
d#E
dt
$ m0ienc
B
: ! ds
: ! m0ienc
Gauss’ Law for Magnetic Fields
The simplest magnetic
structures are magnetic dipoles. Magnetic monopoles do not exist
(as far as we know). Gauss’ law for magnetic fields,
(32-1)
states that the net magnetic flux through any (closed) Gaussian
surface is zero. It implies that magnetic monopoles do not exist.
Maxwell’s Extension of Ampere’s Law
A changing elec-
tric flux induces a magnetic field . Maxwell’s law,
(Maxwell’s law of induction),
(32-3)
relates the magnetic field induced along a closed loop to the
changing electric flux #E through the loop. Ampere’s law,
, B
: ! ds
: ! m0´0
d#E
dt
B
:
#B !, B
: ! dA
: ! 0,
Review & Summary
ferromagnetic material in nearby rock. Because of hysteresis, such rock
material retains some of that magnetization after the lightning strike (after the
currents disappear). Pieces of the rock-later exposed, broken, and loosened by
weathering-are then lodestones.
 needle’s mass m ! (needle’s density)(needle’s volume)
Substituting into Eq. 32-45 with this value for m, and also
55.847 g/mol (! 0.055 847 kg/mol) for M and 6.02 & 1023 for
NA, we find
Finding m: Substituting our value of N and the value of mFe
into Eq. 32-42 then yields
(Answer)
! 2.682 & 10'3 J/T % 2.7 & 10'3 J/T.
m ! (0.10)(1.2774 & 1021)(2.1 & 10'23 J/T)
! 1.2774 & 1021.
N ! (1.185 & 10'4 kg)(6.02 & 1023)
0.055 847 kg/mol
! 1.185 & 10'4 kg.
! (7900 kg/m3)(1.5 & 10'8 m3)

loop. The idea of a displacement current allows us to retain the
notion of continuity of current through a capacitor. However, dis-
placement current is not a transfer of charge.
Maxwell’s Equations
Maxwell’s equations, displayed in
Table 32-1, summarize electromagnetism and form its foundation,
including optics.
Earth’s Magnetic Field
Earth’s magnetic field can be
approximated as being that of a magnetic dipole whose dipole mo-
ment makes an angle of 11.5° with Earth’s rotation axis, and with the
south pole of the dipole in the Northern Hemisphere. The direction
of the local magnetic field at any point on Earth’s surface is given by
the field declination (the angle left or right from geographic north)
and the field inclination (the angle up or down from the horizontal).
Spin Magnetic Dipole Moment
An electron has an intrinsic
angular momentum called spin angular momentum (or spin) , with
which an intrinsic spin magnetic dipole moment
is associated:
(32-22)
For a measurement along a z axis, the component Sz can have only
the values given by
(32-23)
where h (! 6.63 & 10'34 J(s) is the Planck constant. Similarly,
(32-24, 32-26)
where mB is the Bohr magneton:
(32-25)
The energy U associated with the orientation of the spin magnetic
dipole moment in an external magnetic field 
is
(32-27)
Orbital Magnetic Dipole Moment
An electron in an atom
has an additional angular momentum called its orbital angular
momentum
, with which an orbital magnetic dipole moment
is associated:
(32-28)
m
:
orb ! ' e
2m L
:
orb.
m
:
orb
L
:
orb
U ! 'm
:
s ! B
:
ext ! 'ms,zBext.
B
:
ext
mB !
eh
4pm ! 9.27 & 10'24 J/T.
ms,z ! .
eh
4pm ! .mB,
Sz ! ms
h
2p ,   for ms ! . 1
2,
m
:
s ! ' e
m S
:.
m
:
s
S
:
965
QUESTIONS
Orbital angular momentum is quantized and can have only measured
values given by
(32-29)
The associated magnetic dipole moment is given by
(32-30, 32-31)
The energy U associated with the orientation of the orbital mag-
netic dipole moment in an external magnetic field 
is
(32-32)
Diamagnetism
Diamagnetic materials
exhibit magnetism
only when placed in an external magnetic field; there they form
magnetic dipoles directed opposite the external field. In a
nonuniform field, they are repelled from the region of greater
magnetic field.
Paramagnetism
Paramagnetic materials have atoms with a
permanent magnetic dipole moment but the moments are ran-
domly oriented unless the material is in an external magnetic field
, where the dipoles tend to align with the external field. The
extent of alignment within a volume V is measured as the magneti-
zation M, given by
(32-38)
Complete alignment (saturation) of all N dipoles in the volume gives
a maximum value Mmax ! Nm/V.At low values of the ratio Bext/T,
(Curie’s law),
(32-39)
where T is the temperature (kelvins) and C is a material’s Curie
constant.
In a nonuniform external field, a paramagnetic material is 
attracted to the region of greater magnetic field.
Ferromagnetism
The magnetic dipole moments in a ferro-
magnetic material can be aligned by an external magnetic field and
then, after the external field is removed, remain partially aligned in
regions (domains).Alignment is eliminated at temperatures above
a material’s Curie temperature. In a nonuniform external field,
a ferromagnetic material is attracted to the region of greater
magnetic field.
M ! C Bext
T
M ! measured magnetic moment
V
.
B
:
ext
U ! 'm
:
orb ! B
:
ext ! 'morb,zBext.
B
:
ext
morb,z ! 'm!
eh
4pm ! 'm!mB.
for m! ! 0, .1, .2,(((, .(limit).
Lorb,z ! m!
h
2p ,
1
Figure 32-19a shows a capacitor, with circular plates, that is be-
ing charged. Point a (near one of the connecting wires) and point b
(inside the capacitor gap) are equidistant from the central axis, as
are point c (not so near the wire) and point d (between the plates
but outside the gap). In Fig. 32-19b, one curve gives the variation
with distance r of the magnitude of the magnetic field inside and
outside the wire.The other curve gives the variation with distance r
of the magnitude of the magnetic field inside and outside the gap.
The two curves partially overlap. Which of the three points on the
curves correspond to which of the four points of Fig. 32-19a?
Questions
Figure 32-19 Question 1.
B
r
0
2
1
3
(b)
a
c
b
d
(a)

12
Figure 32-26 shows four
steel bars; three are perma-
nent magnets. One of the poles
is indicated. Through experi-
ment we find that ends a and d
attract each other, ends c and f
repel, ends e and h attract, and
ends a and h attract. (a) Which
ends are north poles? (b)
Which bar is not a magnet?
5
An electron in an external magnetic field 
has its spin angu-
lar momentum Sz antiparallel to 
. If the electron undergoes a
spin-flip so that Sz is then parallel with 
, must energy be sup-
plied to or lost by the electron?
6
Does the magnitude of the net force on the current loop of
Figs. 32-12a and b increase, decrease, or remain the same if we in-
crease (a) the magnitude of 
and (b) the divergence of 
?
7
Figure 32-23 shows a face-on
view of one of the two square plates
of a parallel-plate capacitor, as well
as four loops that are located be-
tween the plates. The capacitor is
being discharged. (a) Neglecting
fringing of the magnetic field, rank
the loops according to the magni-
tude of - 
along them, great-
est first. (b) Along which loop, if
any, is the angle between the directions of 
and 
constant 
ds
:
B
:
B
: ! ds
:
B
:
ext
B
:
ext
B
:
ext
B
:
ext
B
:
ext
2
Figure 32-20 shows a parallel-plate ca-
pacitor and the current in the connecting
wires that is discharging the capacitor. Are
the directions of (a) electric field 
and
(b) displacement current id leftward or
rightward between the plates? (c) Is the
magnetic field at point P into or out of the
page?
3
Figure 32-21 shows, in two situations, an electric field vector 
and an induced magnetic field line. In each, is the magnitude of 
increasing or decreasing?
E
:E
:
E
:
966
CHAPTER 32
MAXWELL’S EQUATIONS; MAGNETISM OF MATTER
(so that their dot product can easily be evaluated)? (c) Along
which loop, if any, is B constant (so that B can be brought in front
of the integral sign in Eq. 32-3)?
8
Figure 32-24 shows three loop models of an electron orbiting
counterclockwise within a magnetic field. The fields are nonuni-
form for models 1 and 2 and uniform for model 3. For each model,
are (a) the magnetic dipole moment of the loop and (b) the mag-
netic force on the loop directed up, directed down, or zero?
Figure 32-20
Question 2.
P
i 
i 
Figure 32-21 Question 3.
(a) 
(b)
E
E
B
B
Figure 32-22 Question 4.
a
a
b
b
c
c
Bext
UB
Sz
Bext
(a) 
(b)
Sz
Figure 32-23 Question 7.
d
c
b
a
Figure 32-24 Questions 8, 9, and 10.
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
B
B
B
Figure 32-25 Question 11.
(1) 
(2) 
Impurity line 
(3)
Figure 32-26 Question 12.
c
d
e
f
g
h
a
b
S
4
Figure 32-22a shows a pair of opposite spin orientations for an
electron in an external magnetic field 
. Figure 32-22b gives
three choices for the graph of the energies associated with those
orientations as a function of the magnitude of 
. Choices b and c
consist of intersecting lines, choice a of parallel lines. Which is the
correct choice?
B
:
ext
B
:
ext
9
Replace the current loops of Question 8 and Fig. 32-24 with
diamagnetic spheres. For each field, are (a) the magnetic dipole
moment of the sphere and (b) the magnetic force on the sphere
directed up, directed down, or zero?
10
Replace the current loops of Question 8 and Fig. 32-24 with
paramagnetic spheres. For each field, are (a) the magnetic dipole
moment of the sphere and (b) the magnetic force on the sphere
directed up, directed down, or zero?
11
Figure 32-25 represents three rectangular samples of a ferro-
magnetic material in which the magnetic dipoles of the domains
have been directed out of the page (encircled dot) by a very strong
applied field B0. In each sample, an island domain still has its mag-
netic field directed into the page (encircled &). Sample 1 is one
(pure) crystal. The other samples contain impurities collected
along lines; domains cannot easily spread across such lines.
The applied field is now to be reversed and its magnitude
kept moderate. The change causes the island domain to grow.
(a) Rank the three samples according to the success of that growth,
greatest growth first. Ferromagnetic materials in which the mag-
netic dipoles are easily changed are said to be magnetically soft;
when the changes are difficult, requiring strong applied fields, the
materials are said to be magnetically hard. (b) Of the three sam-
ples, which is the most magnetically hard?

what is the value of -
around the
dashed path?
••7
Uniform electric flux. Figure 32-30
shows a circular region of radius R
3.00 cm in which a uniform
electric flux is directed out of the plane of the page. The total
!
B
: ! ds
:
967
PROBLEMS
electric flux through the region is given by 
#E
(3.00 mV(m/s)t, where t is in seconds.
What is the magnitude of the magnetic field
that is induced at radial distances (a) 2.00 cm
and (b) 5.00 cm?
••8
Nonuniform electric flux. Figure 32-30
shows a circular region of radius R
3.00 cm
in which an electric flux is directed out of the
plane of the page. The flux encircled by a
concentric circle of radius r is given by #E,enc !
(0.600 V(m/s)(r/R)t, where r 3 R and t is in seconds. What is
the magnitude of the induced magnetic field at radial distances
(a) 2.00 cm and (b) 5.00 cm?
••9
Uniform electric field. In Fig. 32-30, a uniform electric field
!
!
Tutoring problem available (at instructor’s discretion) in WileyPLUS and WebAssign
SSM
Worked-out solution available in Student Solutions Manual      
• - •••
Number of dots indicates level of problem difficulty
Additional information available in The Flying Circus of Physics and at flyingcircusofphysics.com
WWW Worked-out solution is at
ILW
Interactive solution is at 
http://www.wiley.com/college/halliday
Problems
Module 32-1
Gauss’ Law for Magnetic Fields
•1
The magnetic flux through each of five faces of a die (singular
of “dice”) is given by #B ! .N Wb, where N (! 1 to 5) is the num-
ber of spots on the face. The flux is positive (outward) for N even
and negative (inward) for N odd.What is the flux through the sixth
face of the die?
•2
Figure 32-27 shows a closed surface.Along
the flat top face, which has a radius of 2.0 cm, a
perpendicular magnetic field 
of magnitude
0.30 T is directed outward. Along the flat bot-
tom face, a magnetic flux of 0.70 mWb is
directed outward. What are the (a) magnitude
and (b) direction (inward or outward) of
the magnetic flux through the curved part of
the surface?
••3
A Gaussian surface in the shape
of a right circular cylinder with end caps has a radius of 12.0 cm
and a length of 80.0 cm. Through one end there is an inward mag-
netic flux of 25.0 mWb. At the other end there is a uniform mag-
netic field of 1.60 mT, normal to the surface and directed outward.
What are the (a) magnitude and (b) direction (inward or outward)
of the net magnetic flux through the curved surface?
•••4
Two wires, parallel to a
z axis and a distance 4r apart,
carry equal currents i in oppo-
site directions, as shown in
Fig. 32-28.A circular cylinder of
radius r and length L has its
axis on the z axis, midway be-
tween the wires. Use Gauss’ law
for magnetism to derive an ex-
pression for the net outward
magnetic flux through the half of the cylindrical surface above the
x axis. (Hint: Find the flux through the portion of the xz plane that
lies within the cylinder.)
Module 32-2
Induced Magnetic Fields
•5
The induced magnetic field at radial distance 6.0 mm
from the central axis of a circular parallel-plate capacitor is 2.0 
10'7 T. The plates have radius 3.0 mm. At what rate 
is the
electric field between the plates changing?
•6
A capacitor with square plates of edge
length L is being discharged by a current of
0.75 A. Figure 32-29 is a head-on view of
one of the plates from inside the capacitor.
A dashed rectangular path is shown. If
L
12 cm, W
4.0 cm, and H
2.0 cm,
!
!
!
dE
:/dt
&
SSM
ILW
SSM
B
:
Figure 32-27
Problem 2.
B
Figure 32-28 Problem 4.
x
y
r
-r
Wire 1 
-2r
2r
Wire 2 
Figure 32-29
Problem 6.
L
H
W
L
Figure 32-30
Problems 7 to 10
and 19 to 22.
R
is directed out of the page within a circular region of radius R ! 3.00
cm. The field magnitude is given by E ! (4.50 & 10'3 V/m(s)t,
where t is in seconds.What is the magnitude of the induced magnetic
field at radial distances (a) 2.00 cm and (b) 5.00 cm?
••10
Nonuniform electric field. In Fig. 32-30, an electric field is
directed out of the page within a circular region of radius R
3.00
cm.The field magnitude is E ! (0.500 V/m(s)(1 ' r/R)t, where t is
in seconds and r is the radial distance (r 3 R). What is the magni-
tude of the induced magnetic field at radial distances (a) 2.00 cm
and (b) 5.00 cm?
••11
Suppose that a parallel-plate capacitor has circular plates
with radius R ! 30 mm and a plate separation of 5.0 mm.
Suppose also that a sinusoidal potential difference with a maxi-
mum value of 150 V and a frequency of 60 Hz is applied across
the plates; that is,
V ! (150 V) sin[2p(60 Hz)t].
(a) Find Bmax(R), the maximum value of the induced magnetic field
that occurs at r ! R. (b) Plot Bmax(r) for 0 / r / 10 cm.
••12
A parallel-plate capacitor with circular plates of radius
40 mm is being discharged by a current of 6.0 A. At what radius
(a) inside and (b) outside the capacitor gap is the magnitude of the
induced magnetic field equal to 75% of its maximum value?
(c) What is that maximum value?
Module 32-3
Displacement Current
•13
At what rate must the potential difference between the
plates of a parallel-plate capacitor with a 2.0 mF capacitance be
changed to produce a displacement current of 1.5 A?
•14
A parallel-plate capacitor with circular plates of radius R is
being charged. Show that the magnitude of the current density of
the displacement current is Jd ! ´0(dE/dt) for r 3 R.
•15
Prove that the displacement current in a parallel-plate
capacitor of capacitance C can be written as id
C(dV/dt), where
V is the potential difference between the plates.
•16
A parallel-plate capacitor with circular plates of radius 0.10 m
is being discharged. A circular loop of radius 0.20 m is concentric
!
SSM
!

968
CHAPTER 32
MAXWELL’S EQUATIONS; MAGNETISM OF MATTER
••24
The magnitude of the electric field
between the two circular parallel plates in
Fig. 32-33 is E ! (4.0 & 105) ' (6.0 & 104t),
with E in volts per meter and t in seconds.
At t ! 0,
is upward.The plate area is 4.0 &
10'2 m2. For t 4 0, what are the (a) magni-
tude and (b) direction (up or down) of the
displacement current between the plates
and (c) is the direction of the induced magnetic field clockwise or
counterclockwise in the figure?
••25
As a parallel-plate capacitor with circular plates 20 cm
in diameter is being charged, the current density of the displace-
ment current in the region between the plates is uniform and has a
magnitude of 20 A/m2. (a) Calculate the magnitude B of the mag-
netic field at a distance r ! 50 mm from the axis of symmetry of
this region. (b) Calculate dE/dt in this region.
••26
A capacitor with parallel circular plates of radius R ! 1.20
cm is discharging via a current of 12.0 A. Consider a loop of radius
R/3 that is centered on the central axis between the plates. (a) How
much displacement current is encircled by the loop? The maximum
induced magnetic field has a magnitude of 12.0 mT.At what radius
(b) inside and (c) outside the capacitor gap is the magnitude of the
induced magnetic field 3.00 mT?
••27
In Fig. 32-34, a uniform
electric field 
collapses. The verti-
cal axis scale is set by Es ! 6.0 & 105
N/C, and the horizontal axis scale is
set by ts ! 12.0 ms. Calculate the
magnitude of the displacement cur-
rent through a 1.6 m2 area perpen-
dicular to the field during each of
the time intervals a, b, and c shown
on the graph. (Ignore the behavior
at the ends of the intervals.)
••28
Figure 32-35a shows the
current i that is produced in a wire
of resistivity 1.62 & 10'8 "(m. The
magnitude of the current versus
time t is shown in Fig. 32-35b. The
vertical axis scale is set by is ! 10.0
A, and the horizontal axis scale is
set by ts ! 50.0 ms. Point P is at
radial distance 9.00 mm from the
wire’s center. Determine the mag-
nitude of the magnetic field 
at
point P due to the actual current i
in the wire at (a) t ! 20 ms, (b) t !
40 ms, and (c) t ! 60 ms. Next, as-
sume that the electric field driving
the current is confined to the wire.
Then determine the magnitude of
the magnetic field 
at point P
due to the displacement current id
in the wire at (d) t ! 20 ms, (e) t !
40 ms, and (f) t ! 60 ms. At point
P at t ! 20 s, what is the direction
(into or out of the page) of (g) 
and (h) 
?
•••29
In Fig.32-36,a capacitor with
circular plates of radius R ! 18.0 cm
B
:
id
B
:
i
B
:
id
B
:
i
E
:
ILW
ILW
E
:
with the capacitor and halfway between the plates. The displace-
ment current through the loop is 2.0 A. At what rate is the electric
field between the plates changing?
••17
A silver wire has resistivity r ! 1.62 & 10'8 "(m and
a cross-sectional area of 5.00 mm2. The current in the wire is uni-
form and changing at the rate of 2000 A/s when the current is
100 A. (a) What is the magnitude of the (uniform) electric field in
the wire when the current in the wire is 100 A? (b) What is the
displacement current in the wire at that time? (c) What is the ratio
of the magnitude of the magnetic field due to the displacement
current to that due to the current at a distance r from the wire?
••18
The circuit in Fig. 32-31 consists
of switch S, a 12.0 V ideal battery, a
20.0 M" resistor, and an air-filled capa-
citor. The capacitor has parallel circular
plates of radius 5.00 cm, separated by
3.00 mm. At time t ! 0, switch S is
closed to begin charging the capacitor.
The electric field between the plates is
uniform. At t ! 250 ms, what is the magnitude of the magnetic
field within the capacitor, at radial distance 3.00 cm?
••19
Uniform displacement-current density. Figure 32-30 shows a
circular region of radius R ! 3.00 cm in which a displacement cur-
rent is directed out of the page. The displacement current has a
uniform density of magnitude Jd ! 6.00 A/m2. What is the magni-
tude of the magnetic field due to the displacement current at radial
distances (a) 2.00 cm and (b) 5.00 cm?
••20
Uniform displacement current. Figure 32-30 shows a circular
region of radius R ! 3.00 cm in which a uniform displacement cur-
rent id ! 0.500 A is out of the page. What is the magnitude of the
magnetic field due to the displacement current at radial distances
(a) 2.00 cm and (b) 5.00 cm?
••21
Nonuniform displacement-current density. Figure 32-30
shows a circular region of radius R
3.00 cm in which a displace-
ment current is directed out of the page.The magnitude of the den-
sity of this displacement current is Jd ! (4.00 A/m2)(1 ' r/R),
where r is the radial distance (r 3 R).What is the magnitude of the
magnetic field due to the displacement current at (a) r ! 2.00 cm
and (b) r ! 5.00 cm?
••22
Nonuniform displacement current. Figure 32-30 shows a
circular region of radius R
3.00 cm in which a displacement
current id is directed out of the figure. The magnitude of the 
displacement current is id ! (3.00 A)(r/R),
where r is the radial distance (r 3 R) from the
center. What is the magnitude of the mag-
netic field due to id at radial distances (a)
2.00 cm and (b) 5.00 cm?
••23
In Fig. 32-32, a parallel-plate
capacitor has square plates of edge length
L
1.0 m.A current of 2.0 A charges the ca-
pacitor, producing a uniform electric field 
between the plates, with 
perpendicular to
the plates. (a) What is the displacement cur-
rent id through the region between the
plates? (b) What is dE/dt in this region?
(c) What is the displacement current encir-
cled by the square dashed path of edge
length d ! 0.50 m? (d) What is the value of 
-
around this square dashed path?
B
: ! ds
:
E
:
E
:
!
ILW
SSM
!
!
Figure 32-31 Problem 18.
S
R
C
Figure 32-32
Problem 23.
L
i
i
Top view 
Edge view 
d
Figure 32-34 Problem 27.
a 
b 
Es
0
ts
Time (  s) 
µ
E (105 N/C)
c
Figure 32-35 Problem 28.
Wire
P
i
(a)
(b)
is
0
ts
t (ms) 
i (A) 
R
d
m sin   t
ω 
=
Figure 32-36 Problem 29.
Figure 32-33
Problem 24.
E

969
PROBLEMS
the direction of (b) the loop’s net magnetic dipole moment 
,
(c) the conventional current i in the loop (clockwise or counter-
clockwise in the figure), and (d) the magnetic force on the loop?
•••38
Assume that an electron of mass m and charge magnitude e
moves in a circular orbit of radius r about a nucleus. A uniform
magnetic field 
is then established perpendicular to the plane of
the orbit. Assuming also that the radius of the orbit does not
change and that the change in the speed of the electron due to field
is small, find an expression for the change in the orbital magnetic
dipole moment of the electron due to the field.
Module 32-7
Paramagnetism
•39
A sample of the paramagnetic salt to which the magnetization
curve of Fig. 32-14 applies is to be tested to see whether it obeys
Curie’s law.The sample is placed in a uniform 0.50 T magnetic field
that remains constant throughout the experiment. The magnetiza-
tion M is then measured at temperatures ranging from 10 to 300 K.
Will it be found that Curie’s law is valid under these conditions?
•40
A sample of the paramagnetic salt to which the magnetization
curve of Fig. 32-14 applies is held at room temperature (300 K).
At what applied magnetic field will the degree of magnetic satura-
tion of the sample be (a) 50% and (b) 90%? (c) Are these fields
attainable in the laboratory?
•41
A magnet in the form of a cylindrical rod has a
length of 5.00 cm and a diameter of 1.00 cm. It has a uniform mag-
netization of 5.30 & 103 A/m.What is its magnetic dipole moment?
•42
A 0.50 T magnetic field is applied to a paramagnetic gas
whose atoms have an intrinsic magnetic dipole moment of 1.0 &
10'23 J/T. At what temperature will the mean kinetic energy of
translation of the atoms equal the energy required to reverse such
a dipole end for end in this magnetic field?
••43
An electron with kinetic energy Ke travels in a circular path
that is perpendicular to a uniform magnetic field, which is in the
positive direction of a z axis. The electron’s motion is subject only
to the force due to the field. (a) Show that the magnetic dipole mo-
ment of the electron due to its orbital motion has magnitude m !
Ke/B and that it is in the direction opposite that of .What are the
(b) magnitude and (c) direction of the magnetic dipole moment of
a positive ion with kinetic energy Ki under the same circum-
stances? (d) An ionized gas consists of 5.3 & 10 21 electrons/m3 and
the same number density of ions.Take the average electron kinetic
energy to be 6.2 & 10'20 J and the average ion kinetic energy to be
7.6 & 10'21 J. Calculate the magnetization of the gas when it is in a
magnetic field of 1.2 T.
••44
Figure 32-39 gives the magne-
tization curve for a paramagnetic
material. The vertical axis scale is set
by a ! 0.15, and the horizontal axis
scale is set by b ! 0.2 T/K. Let msam
be the measured net magnetic mo-
ment of a sample of the material and
mmax be the maximum possible net
magnetic moment of that sample.
According to Curie’s law, what would
be the ratio msam/mmax were the sample placed in a uniform mag-
netic field of magnitude 0.800 T, at a temperature of 2.00 K?
•••45
Consider a solid containing N atoms per unit volume,
each atom having a magnetic dipole moment . Suppose the direc-
tion of 
can be only parallel or antiparallel to an externally
m
:
m
:
SSM
B
:
ILW
SSM
B
:
B
:
m
:
is connected to a source of emf # ! #m sin vt, where #m ! 220 V
and v ! 130 rad/s. The maximum value of the displacement cur-
rent is id ! 7.60 mA. Neglect fringing of the electric field at the
edges of the plates. (a) What is the maximum value of the current i
in the circuit? (b) What is the maximum value of d#E/dt, where #E
is the electric flux through the region between the plates? (c) What
is the separation d between the plates? (d) Find the maximum
value of the magnitude of 
between the plates at a distance 
r ! 11.0 cm from the center.
Module 32-4
Magnets
•30
Assume the average value of the vertical component
of Earth’s magnetic field is 43 mT (downward) for all of Arizona,
which has an area of 2.95 & 105 km2. What then are the (a) magni-
tude and (b) direction (inward or outward) of the net magnetic
flux through the rest of Earth’s surface (the entire surface exclud-
ing Arizona)?
•31
In New Hampshire the average horizontal component of
Earth’s magnetic field in 1912 was 16 mT, and the average inclina-
tion or “dip” was 73°. What was the corresponding magnitude of
Earth’s magnetic field?
Module 32-5
Magnetism and Electrons
•32
Figure 32-37a is a one-axis
graph along which two of the allowed
energy values (levels) of an atom are
plotted.When the atom is placed in a
magnetic field of 0.500 T, the graph
changes to that of Fig. 32-37b be-
cause of the energy associated with
. (We neglect 
.) Level E1 is
unchanged, but level E2 splits into a
(closely spaced) triplet of levels.
What are the allowed values of 
associated with (a) energy level E1 and (b) energy level E2? (c) In
joules, what amount of energy is represented by the spacing
between the triplet levels?
•33
If an electron in an atom has an orbital angular
momentum with 
, what are the components (a) Lorb,z and
(b) morb,z? If the atom is in an external magnetic field
that has
magnitude 35 mT and is directed along the z axis, what are (c) the
energy Uorb associated with 
and (d) the energy Uspin associated
with 
? If, instead, the electron has 
, what are (e) Lorb,z,
(f) morb,z, (g) Uorb, and (h) Uspin?
•34
What is the energy difference between parallel and
antiparallel alignment of the z component of an electron’s spin
magnetic dipole moment with an external magnetic field of magni-
tude 0.25 T, directed parallel to the z axis?
•35
What is the measured component of the orbital magnetic di-
pole moment of an electron with (a) 
and (b) 
?
•36
An electron is placed in a magnetic field 
that is directed
along a z axis.The energy difference between parallel and antipar-
allel alignments of the z component of the electron’s spin magnetic
moment with 
is 6.00 & 10'25 J.What is the magnitude of ?
Module 32-6
Diamagnetism
•37
Figure 32-38 shows a loop
model (loop L) for a diamagnetic
material. (a) Sketch the magnetic
field lines within and about the ma-
terial due to the bar magnet. What is
B
:
B
:
B
:
m! ! '2
m! ! 1
m ! '3
m
:
s
m
:
orb
B
:
m ! 0
WWW
SSM
m!
m
:
s
m
:
orb ! B
:
B
:
Figure 32-37 Problem 32.
E2
E1
E1
(a) 
(b)
Figure 32-38
Problems 37 and 71.
S
Axis
L
N
x
Figure 32-39 Problem 44.
M/Mmax
a
0
Bext/T (T/K) 
b

970
CHAPTER 32
MAXWELL’S EQUATIONS; MAGNETISM OF MATTER
••52
Measurements in mines and boreholes indicate that Earth’s
interior temperature increases with depth at the average rate of
30 C°/km. Assuming a surface temperature of 10°C, at what depth
does iron cease to be ferromagnetic? (The Curie temperature of
iron varies very little with pressure.)
••53
A Rowland ring is formed of ferromagnetic material. It is
circular in cross section, with an inner radius of 5.0 cm and an outer
radius of 6.0 cm, and is wound with 400 turns of wire. (a) What cur-
rent must be set up in the windings to attain a toroidal field of mag-
nitude B0 ! 0.20 mT? (b) A secondary coil wound around the
toroid has 50 turns and resistance 8.0 ". If, for this value of B0, we
have BM ! 800B0, how much charge moves through the secondary
coil when the current in the toroid windings is turned on?
Additional Problems
54
Using the approximations given in Problem 61, find (a) the al-
titude above Earth’s surface where the magnitude of its magnetic
field is 50.0% of the surface value at the same latitude; (b) the
maximum magnitude of the magnetic field at the core-mantle
boundary, 2900 km below Earth’s surface; and the (c) magnitude
and (d) inclination of Earth’s magnetic field at the north geo-
graphic pole. (e) Suggest why the values you calculated for (c) and
(d) differ from measured values.
55
Earth has a magnetic dipole moment of 8.0 & 1022 J/T.
(a) What current would have to be produced in a single turn of
wire extending around Earth at its geomagnetic equator if we
wished to set up such a dipole? Could such an arrangement
be used to cancel out Earth’s magnetism (b) at points in space well
above Earth’s surface or (c) on Earth’s surface?
56
A charge q is distributed uniformly around a thin ring of ra-
dius r.The ring is rotating about an axis through its center and per-
pendicular to its plane, at an angular speed v. (a) Show that the
magnetic moment due to the rotating charge has magnitude
. (b) What is the direction of this magnetic moment if
the charge is positive?
57
A magnetic compass has its needle, of mass 0.050 kg and
length 4.0 cm, aligned with the horizontal component of Earth’s
magnetic field at a place where that component has the value Bh !
16 mT. After the compass is given a momentary gentle shake, the
needle oscillates with angular frequency v ! 45 rad/s. Assuming
that the needle is a uniform thin rod mounted at its center, find the
magnitude of its magnetic dipole moment.
58
The capacitor in Fig. 32-7 is being charged with a 2.50 A cur-
rent. The wire radius is 1.50 mm, and the plate radius is 2.00 cm.
Assume that the current i in the wire and the displacement current
id in the capacitor gap are both uniformly distributed. What is the
magnitude of the magnetic field due to i at the following radial
distances from the wire’s center: (a) 1.00 mm (inside the wire),
(b) 3.00 mm (outside the wire), and (c) 2.20 cm (outside the wire)?
What is the magnitude of the magnetic field due to id at the follow-
ing radial distances from the central axis between the plates:
(d) 1.00 mm (inside the gap), (e) 3.00 mm (inside the gap), and
(f) 2.20 cm (outside the gap)? (g) Explain why the fields at the two
smaller radii are so different for the wire and the gap but the fields
at the largest radius are not.
59
A parallel-plate capacitor with circular plates of radius 
R ! 16 mm and gap width d ! 5.0 mm has a uniform electric field
between the plates. Starting at time t ! 0, the potential difference
between the two plates is V ! (100 V)e't/t, where the time con-
stant t ! 12 ms. At radial distance r ! 0.80R from the central axis,
m ! 1
2qvr 2
applied magnetic field 
(this will be the case if 
is due to the spin
of a single electron).According to statistical mechanics, the proba-
bility of an atom being in a state with energy U is proportional to
e'U/kT, where T is the temperature and k is Boltzmann’s constant.
Thus,because energy U is 
,the fraction of atoms whose dipole
moment is parallel to 
is proportional to emB/kT and the fraction of
atoms whose dipole moment is antiparallel to 
is proportional to
e'mB/kT. (a) Show that the magnitude of the magnetization of this
solid is M ! Nm tanh(mB/kT). Here tanh is the hyperbolic tangent
function: tanh(x)
(ex ' e'x)/(ex $ e'x). (b) Show that the result
given in (a) reduces to M
Nm2B/kT for 
. (c) Show
that the result of (a) reduces to M
Nm for 
. (d) Show
that both (b) and (c) agree qualitatively with Fig. 32-14.
Module 32-8
Ferromagnetism
••46
You place a magnetic compass on a horizontal surface, al-
low the needle to settle, and then give the compass a gentle wiggle
to cause the needle to oscillate about its equilibrium position. The
oscillation frequency is 0.312 Hz. Earth’s magnetic field at the
location of the compass has a horizontal component of 18.0 mT.
The needle has a magnetic moment of 0.680 mJ/T. What is the
needle’s rotational inertia about its (vertical) axis of rotation?
••47
The magnitude of the magnetic dipole
moment of Earth is 8.0
10 22 J/T. (a) If the origin of this magne-
tism were a magnetized iron sphere at the center of Earth, what
would be its radius? (b) What fraction of the volume of Earth
would such a sphere occupy? Assume complete alignment of the
dipoles.The density of Earth’s inner core is 14 g/cm3.The magnetic
dipole moment of an iron atom is 2.1 & 10'23 J/T. (Note: Earth’s
inner core is in fact thought to be in both liquid and solid forms
and partly iron, but a permanent magnet as the source of Earth’s
magnetism has been ruled out by several considerations. For one,
the temperature is certainly above the Curie point.)
••48
The magnitude of the dipole moment associated with an
atom of iron in an iron bar is 2.1 & 10'23 J/T. Assume that all the
atoms in the bar, which is 5.0 cm long and has a cross-sectional
area of 1.0 cm2, have their dipole moments aligned. (a) What is the
dipole moment of the bar? (b) What torque must be exerted to
hold this magnet perpendicular to an external field of magnitude
1.5 T? (The density of iron is 7.9 g/cm3.)
••49
The exchange coupling mentioned in Module 32-8 as
being responsible for ferromagnetism is not the mutual magnetic
interaction between two elementary magnetic dipoles. To show
this, calculate (a) the magnitude of the magnetic field a distance of
10 nm away, along the dipole axis, from an atom with magnetic
dipole moment 1.5 & 10'23 J/T (cobalt), and (b) the minimum
energy required to turn a second identical dipole end for end in
this field. (c) By comparing the latter with the mean translational
kinetic energy of 0.040 eV, what can you conclude?
••50
A magnetic rod with length 6.00 cm, radius 3.00 mm, and
(uniform) magnetization 2.70 & 10 3 A/m can turn about its center
like a compass needle. It is placed in a uniform magnetic field 
of
magnitude 35.0 mT, such that the directions of its dipole moment
and 
make an angle of 68.0+. (a) What is the magnitude of the
torque on the rod due to ? (b) What is the change in the orienta-
tion energy of the rod if the angle changes to 34.0°?
••51
The saturation magnetization Mmax of the ferromagnetic
metal nickel is 4.70 & 105 A/m. Calculate the magnetic dipole mo-
ment of a single nickel atom. (The density of nickel is 8.90 g/cm3,
and its molar mass is 58.71 g/mol.)
B
:
B
:
B
:
SSM
&
WWW
ILW
SSM
mB 5 kT
!
mB 6 kT
!
!
B
:
B
: 'm
: ! B
:
m
:
B
:

971
PROBLEMS
68
What is the measured component of the orbital magnetic
dipole moment of an electron with the values (a) 
and
(b)
?
69
In Fig. 32-43, a bar magnet lies near a paper cylinder.
(a) Sketch the magnetic field lines that pass through the surface of
the cylinder. (b) What is the sign of 
for every area 
on the
surface? (c) Does this contradict Gauss’ law for magnetism?
Explain.
dA
:
B
: ! dA
:
m! ! '4
m! ! 3
what is the magnetic field magnitude (a) as a
function of time for t 4 0 and (b) at time t ! 3t?
60
A magnetic flux of 7.0 mWb is directed out-
ward through the flat bottom face of the closed
surface shown in Fig. 32-40. Along the flat top
face (which has a radius of 4.2 cm) there is a
0.40 T magnetic field 
directed perpendicular
to the face. What are the (a) magnitude and 
(b) direction (inward or outward) of the magnetic
flux through the curved part of the surface?
61
The magnetic field of Earth can be approximated as the
magnetic field of a dipole.The horizontal and vertical components
of this field at any distance r from Earth’s center are given by
where lm is the magnetic latitude (this type of latitude is measured
from the geomagnetic equator toward the north or south geomag-
netic pole). Assume that Earth’s magnetic dipole moment has
magnitude m ! 8.00 & 10 22 A(m2. (a) Show that the magnitude of
Earth’s field at latitude lm is given by
(b) Show that the inclination fi of the magnetic field is related to
the magnetic latitude lm by tan fi ! 2 tan lm.
62
Use the results displayed in Problem 61 to predict the
(a) magnitude and (b) inclination of Earth’s magnetic field at the
geomagnetic equator, the (c) magnitude and (d) inclination at geo-
magnetic latitude 60.0°, and the (e) magnitude and (f) inclination
at the north geomagnetic pole.
63
A parallel-plate capacitor with circular plates of radius
55.0 mm is being charged.At what radius (a) inside and (b) outside
the capacitor gap is the magnitude of the induced magnetic field
equal to 50.0% of its maximum value?
64
A sample of the paramagnetic salt to which the magnetization
curve of Fig. 32-14 applies is immersed in a uniform magnetic field
of 2.0 T. At what temperature will the degree of magnetic satura-
tion of the sample be (a) 50% and (b) 90%?
65
A parallel-plate capacitor with circular plates of radius R is
being discharged. The displacement current through a central cir-
cular area, parallel to the plates and
with radius R/2, is 2.0 A.What is the
discharging current?
66
Figure 32-41 gives the variation
of an electric field that is perpendi-
cular to a circular area of 2.0 m2.
During the time period shown, what
is the greatest displacement current
through the area?
67
In Fig. 32-42, a parallel-plate
capacitor is being discharged by a
current i ! 5.0 A. The plates are
square with edge length L ! 8.0 mm.
(a) What is the rate at which the elec-
tric field between the plates is chang-
ing? (b) What is the value of -
around the dashed path,
where 
H ! 2.0 mm and W ! 3.0 mm?
B
: ! ds
:
B ! m0m
4pr 3 21 $ 3 sin2 lm.
Bh ! m0m
4pr 3  cos lm,  Bv ! m0m
2pr 3  sin lm,
SSM
B
:
Figure 32-40
Problem 60.
B
Figure 32-41 Problem 66.
6
4
2
2 
4 
6 
8 10 12 
t (   s) 
µ
E (N/C) 
Figure 32-42 Problem 67.
L
H
W
i
Figure 32-43 Problem 69.
N 
S 
Central
axis
70
In the lowest energy state of the hydrogen atom, the most
probable distance of the single electron from the central proton
(the nucleus) is 5.2 & 10'11 m. (a) Compute the magnitude of the
proton’s electric field at that distance. The component ms,z of the
proton’s spin magnetic dipole moment measured on a z axis is
1.4 & 10'26 J/T. (b) Compute the magnitude of the proton’s mag-
netic field at the distance 5.2 & 10'11 m on the z axis. (Hint: Use
Eq. 29-27.) (c) What is the ratio of the spin magnetic dipole
moment of the electron to that of the proton?
71
Figure 32-38 shows a loop model (loop L) for a paramagnetic
material. (a) Sketch the field lines through and about the material
due to the magnet.What is the direction of (b) the loop’s net mag-
netic dipole moment , (c) the conventional current i in the loop
(clockwise or counterclockwise in the figure), and (d) the magnetic
force acting on the loop?
72
Two plates (as in Fig. 32-7) are being discharged by a
constant current. Each plate has a radius of 4.00 cm. During the
discharging, at a point between the plates at radial distance
2.00 cm from the central axis, the magnetic field has a magnitude
of 12.5 nT. (a) What is the magnitude of the magnetic field at
radial distance 6.00 cm? (b) What is the current in the wires
attached to the plates?
73
If an electron in an atom has orbital angular momentum
with 
values limited by 
3, how many values of (a) Lorb,z and
(b) morb,z can the electron have? In terms of h, m, and e, what is the
greatest allowed magnitude for (c) Lorb,z and (d) morb,z? (e) What is
the greatest allowed magnitude for the z component of the elec-
tron’s net angular momentum (orbital plus spin)? (f) How many
values (signs included) are allowed for the z component of its net
angular momentum?
74
A parallel-plate capacitor with circular plates is being
charged. Consider a circular loop centered on the central axis and
located between the plates. If the loop radius of 3.00 cm is greater
than the plate radius, what is the displacement current between the
plates when the magnetic field along the loop has magnitude
2.00 mT?
75
Suppose that 
4 are the limits to the values of 
for an elec-
tron in an atom. (a) How many different values of the electron’s
morb,z are possible? (b) What is the greatest magnitude of those pos-
sible values? Next, if the atom is in a magnetic field of magnitude
0.250 T, in the positive direction of the z axis, what are (c) the max-
imum energy and (d) the minimum energy associated with those
possible values of morb,z?
76
What are the measured components of the orbital magnetic
dipole moment of an electron with (a) 
and (b) 
?
m! ! '4
m! ! 3
m!
.
.
m/
SSM
m
:
