One of the great laws of physics is
Faraday’s law of induction, which
says that a changing magnetic flux
produces an induced emf. This photo
shows a bar magnet moving into (or
out of) a coil of wire, and the
galvanometer registers an induced
current. This phenomenon of
electromagnetic induction is the
basis for many practical devices,
including generators, alternators,
transformers, magnetic recording on
tape or disk (hard drive), and
computer memory.

H

C

A P T

E

R

21

CONTENTS

21–1 Induced EMF
21–2 Faraday’s Law of Induction;

Lenz’s Law

21–3 EMF Induced in a Moving

Conductor

21–4 Changing Magnetic Flux
Produces an Electric Field

21–5 Electric Generators
21–6 Back EMF and Counter

Torque; Eddy Currents

21–7 Transformers and

Transmission of Power

*21–8 Information Storage:

Magnetic and Semiconductor;
Tape, Hard Drive, RAM

*21–9 Applications of Induction:

Microphone, Seismograph, GFCI

*21–10 Inductance
*21–11 Energy Stored in a Magnetic

Field

*21–12 LR Circuit
*21–13 AC Circuits and Reactance
*21–14 LRC Series AC Circuit
*21–15 Resonance in AC Circuits
590

Electromagnetic Induction
and Faraday’s Law

CHAPTER-OPENING QUESTION—Guess now!
In the photograph above, the bar magnet is inserted down into the coil of wire,
and  is  left  there  for  1 minute; then  it  is  pulled  up  and  out  from  the  coil. What
would an observer watching the galvanometer see?

(a) No change (pointer stays on zero): without a battery there is no current to

detect.

(b) A small current flows while the magnet is inside the coil of wire.
(c) A current spike as the magnet enters the coil, and then nothing.
(d) A current spike as the magnet enters the coil, and then a steady small current.
(e) A current spike as the magnet enters the coil, then nothing (pointer at zero),
then a current spike in the opposite direction as the magnet exits the coil.

I n Chapter 20, we discussed two ways in which electricity and magnetism are

related: (1) an electric current produces a magnetic field; and (2) a magnetic
field exerts a force on an electric current or on a moving electric charge. These
discoveries were made in 1820–1821. Scientists then began to wonder: if electric
currents produce a magnetic field, is it possible that a magnetic field can produce
an  electric  current? Ten  years  later  the  American  Joseph  Henry  (1797–1878)
and the Englishman Michael Faraday (1791–1867) independently found that it
was possible. Henry actually made the discovery first. But Faraday published his
results  earlier  and  investigated  the  subject  in  more  detail. We  now  discuss  this
phenomenon and some of its world-changing applications including the electric
generator.

21–1 Induced EMF

In his attempt to produce an electric current from a magnetic field, Faraday used
an apparatus like that shown in Fig. 21–1. A coil of wire, X, was connected to a
battery. The current that flowed through X produced a magnetic field that was
intensified  by  the  ring-shaped  iron  core  around  which  the  wire  was  wrapped.
Faraday hoped that a strong steady current in X would produce a great enough mag-
netic field to produce a current in a second coil Y wrapped on the same iron ring.

–+

Switch

Iron

Battery

X

Y

Galvanometer

–10

0 +10

FIGURE 21–1 Faraday’s experiment
to induce an emf.

This second circuit, Y, contained a galvanometer to detect any current but contained
no battery. He met no success with constant currents. But the long-sought effect was
finally observed when Faraday noticed the galvanometer in circuit Y deflect strongly
at the moment he closed the switch in circuit X. And the galvanometer deflected
strongly in the opposite direction when he opened the switch in X. A constant
current in X produced a constant magnetic field which produced no current in Y.
Only when the current in X was starting or stopping was a current produced in Y.
Faraday concluded that although a constant magnetic field produces no current
in a conductor, a changing magnetic field can produce an electric current. Such a cur-
rent is called an induced current. When the magnetic field through coil Y changes,
a current occurs in Y as if there were a source of emf in circuit Y. We therefore say that

a changing magnetic field induces an emf.

Faraday did further experiments on electromagnetic induction, as this phenom-
enon is called. For example, Fig. 21–2 shows that if a magnet is moved quickly into
a coil of wire, a current is induced in the wire. If the magnet is quickly removed,
through  the  coil  decreases).
a  current  is  induced  in  the  opposite  direction  (
Furthermore, if the magnet is held steady and the coil of wire is moved toward
or away from the magnet, again an emf is induced and a current flows. Motion or
change is required to induce an emf. It doesn’t matter whether the magnet or the
coil moves. It is their relative motion that counts.

B
B

C A U T I O N
Changing
induces current

B
B

,

not

B
B

itself,

C A U T I O N
Relative motion—magnet
or coil moving induces current

FIGURE 21–2 (a) A current is induced when a magnet is moved toward a coil, momentarily increasing the magnetic
field through the coil. (b) The induced current is opposite when the magnet is moved away from the coil ( decreases).
Note that the galvanometer zero is at the center of the scale and the needle deflects left or right, depending on the
direction of the current. In (c), no current is induced if the magnet does not move relative to the coil. It is the
relative motion that counts here: the magnet can be held steady and the coil moved, which also induces an emf.

B
B

–10

0 +10

–10

0 +10

–10

0 +10

I

I

I = 0

I

N

I

Magnet
moves up
toward coil
  (    in coil
   increasing)

B
B

(b)

(a)

S

N

S

Magnet
moves
down
B
  (    in coil
B
   decreasing)

(c)

N

S

No
movement
B
  (    in coil
B
   constant)

SECTION 21–1 591

EXERCISE A Return to the Chapter-Opening Question, page 590, and answer it again
now. Try to explain why you may have answered differently the first time.

21–2 Faraday’s Law of Induction; Lenz’s Law

B
B

Faraday investigated quantitatively what factors influence the magnitude of the emf
induced. He found first of all that the more rapidly the magnetic field changes, the
greater the induced emf. He also found that the induced emf depends on the area
of the circuit loop (and also the angle it makes with  ). In fact, it is found that the
emf is proportional to the rate of change of the magnetic flux,
passing through
the circuit or loop of area A. Magnetic flux for a uniform magnetic field through
a loop of area A is defined as
£
B

(21;1)
is the component of the magnetic field  perpendicular to the face of the
Here
and  a line  perpendicular  to  the  face  of  the
loop, and
loop. These quantities are shown in Fig. 21–3 for a square loop of side  whose
A = l2.
= 0.
area is
B
When
B

When the face of the loop is parallel to
u = 0°,

is perpendicular to the face of the loop,

B
, u = 90°
B
and

= B⊥ A = BA cos u.

is  the  angle  between

[B uniform]

l
£
B

and

B⊥

B
B

B
B

B ,

£

u

£

B

= BA.

[uniform B

B ⊥ loop face]

B
E

£
B

B
B
As we saw in Chapter 20, the lines of
(like lines of  ) can be drawn such that
the number of lines per unit area is proportional to the field strength. Then the
flux
can  be  thought  of  as  being  proportional  to  the  total  number  of  lines
passing  through  the  area  enclosed  by  the  loop. This  is  illustrated  in  Fig. 21–4,
u = 90°,
where three wire loops of a coil are viewed from the side (on edge). For
£
is a maxi-
no magnetic field lines pass through the loops and
B
this  is  called
mum  when
a weber:

£
B
The  unit  of  magnetic  flux  is  the

= 0,
whereas
tesla-meter2;

1 Wb = 1 T(cid:2)m2.

u = 0°.

With our definition of flux, Eq. 21–1, we can write down the results of Faraday’s
induced  in  a circuit  is  equal  to  the  rate  of  change  of

e

investigations: The  emf
magnetic flux through the circuit:

B
B

θ

B||

B
B

θ B⊥

A = l 2
l

l

FIGURE 21–3 Determining the flux
through a flat loop of wire. This loop
is square, of side  and area A = l2.
l

FIGURE 21–4 Magnetic flux
B
is proportional to the number of
lines of
of a coil (here with 3 loops).

that pass through the loops

B
B

£

B
B

θ
= 90°
= 0(cid:2)B
(a)

θ

= 45°
(cid:2)B = BA cos 45°
(b)

= 0°θ
= BA
(cid:2)B
(c)

FARADAY’S LAW
OF INDUCTION

e = –

¢£
B
¢t

.

[1 loop]

(21;2a)

This fundamental result is known as Faraday’s law of induction, and it is one of
the basic laws of electromagnetism.

If the circuit contains N loops that are closely wrapped so the same flux passes

through each, the emfs induced in each loop add together, so the total emf is

FARADAY’S LAW
OF INDUCTION

e = –N

¢£
B
¢t

.

[N loops]

(21;2b)

B
B

B = 0.16 T.

A loop of wire in a magnetic field. A square loop of wire
is in a uniform magnetic field
What is the mag-
B
B
is perpendicular to the face of the loop and
is at an angle of 30° to the area of the loop? (c) What is the magnitude
and it is rotated

EXAMPLE 21;1
l = 5.0 cm
of side
netic flux in the loop (a) when
(b) when
of the average current in the loop if it has a resistance of
from position (b) to position (a) in 0.14 s?
Eq. 21–1, to calculate the
APPROACH We use the definition
B
magnetic flux. Then we use Faraday’s law of induction to find the induced emf
in the coil, and from that the induced current
SOLUTION The area of the coil is
(a)

u = 0°
= BA cos 0° = (0.16 T)A2.5 * 10–3 m2B(1) = 4.0 * 10–4 T(cid:2)m2

A = l2 = A5.0 * 10–2 mB2 = 2.5 * 10–3 m2.

is perpendicular to the coil’s face, so

= BA cos u,

(I = e(cid:2)R).

0.012 (cid:3)

and

B
B

£

£
B
4.0 * 10–4 Wb.

or
(b) The angle
£
B

u

is 30° and

, so
= BA cos u = (0.16 T)A2.5 * 10–3 m2B cos 30° = 3.5 * 10–4 T(cid:2)m2

cos 30° = 0.866

592 CHAPTER 21

or

3.5 * 10–4 Wb,

a bit less than in part (a).

(c) The magnitude of the induced emf (Eq. 21–2a) during the 0.14-s time interval is
A4.0 * 10–4 T(cid:2)m2B - A3.5 * 10–4 T(cid:2)m2B
0.14 s

= 3.6 * 10–4 V.

¢£
B
¢t

e =

=

Before and after the loop rotates, when it is at rest, the emf is zero. The current
in the wire loop (Ohm’s law) while it is rotating is

I =

e
R

= 3.6 * 10–4 V
0.012 (cid:3)

= 0.030 A = 30 mA.

The minus signs in Eqs. 21–2a and b are there to remind us in which direction

the induced emf acts. Experiments show that

a  current  produced  by  an  induced  emf  moves  in  a direction  so  that  the
magnetic field created by that current opposes the original change in flux.

This is known as Lenz’s law. Be aware that we are now discussing two distinct mag-
netic fields: (1) the changing magnetic field or flux that induces the current, and
(2) the magnetic field produced by the induced current (all currents produce a
magnetic field). The second (induced) field opposes the change in the first.

Lenz’s law can be said another way, valid even if no current can flow (as when

a circuit is not complete):

An induced emf is always in a direction that opposes the original change in
flux that caused it.

Let us apply Lenz’s law to the relative motion between a magnet and a coil,
Fig. 21–2. The changing flux through the coil induces an emf in the coil, produc-
ing a current. This induced current produces its own magnetic field. In Fig. 21–2a
the distance between the coil and the magnet decreases. The magnet’s magnetic
field (and number of field lines) through the coil increases, and therefore the flux
increases. The magnetic field of the magnet points upward. To oppose the upward
increase, the  magnetic  field  produced  by  the  induced  current  needs  to  point
downward inside the coil. Thus, Lenz’s law tells us the current moves as shown in
Fig. 21–2a (use the right-hand rule). In Fig. 21–2b, the flux decreases (because the
magnet is moved away and B decreases), so the induced current in the coil produces
an upward magnetic field through the coil that is “trying” to maintain the status
quo. Thus the current in Fig. 21–2b is in the opposite direction from Fig. 21–2a.

It is important to note that an emf is induced whenever there is a change in

flux through the coil, and we now consider some more possibilities.

I

(b)

Flux
through
coil is
decreased
because A
decreased

B
B
(inward)

(a)
£
B

= BA cos u,

Magnetic  flux
so  an  emf  can  be  induced  in  three  ways:
(1) by a changing magnetic field B; (2) by changing the area A of the loop in the field;
u
or (3) by changing the loop’s orientation  with respect to the field. Figures 21–1
and 21–2 showed case 1. Cases 2 and 3 are illustrated in Figs. 21–5 and 21–6.

C A U T I O N
Distinguish two different
magnetic fields

FIGURE 21–5 A current can be
induced by changing the coil’s area,
even though B doesn’t change. Here
the area A is reduced by pulling on the
sides of the coil: the flux through the
coil is reduced as we go from (a) to (b).
The brief induced current acts in the
direction shown so as to try to maintain
the original flux
producing its own magnetic field into
the page. That is, as area A decreases,
the current acts to increase B in the
original (inward) direction.

(£ = BA)

by

B
B
(inward)

Flux
decreasing

FIGURE 21–6 A current can be induced
by rotating a coil in a magnetic field. The
flux through the coil changes from (a) to (b)
because  (in Eq. 21–1,
went from

to 90° (cos u = 0).

£ = BA cos u

0° (cos u = 1)

)

u

(a) Maximum flux

(b) Zero flux

SECTION 21–2 593

CONCEPTUAL EXAMPLE 21;2
Induction stove. In an induction stove
(Fig. 21–7), an ac current exists in a coil that is the “burner” (a burner that never
gets hot). Why will it heat a metal pan, usually iron, but not a glass container?

RESPONSE The ac current sets up a changing magnetic field that passes through
the pan bottom. This changing magnetic field induces a current in the pan, and
since the pan offers resistance, electric energy is transformed to thermal energy which
heats the pan and its contents. If the pan is iron, magnetic hysteresis due to the
changing current produces additional heating. A glass container offers such high
resistance that little current is induced and little energy is transferred AP = V2(cid:2)RB.

FIGURE 21–7 Example 21–2:
An induction stove.

SOLV ING

M
E
L
B
O
R
P

Lenz’s Law
Lenz’s  law  is  used  to  determine  the  direction  of  the
(conventional) electric current induced in a loop due to
a change in magnetic flux inside the loop. To produce
an induced current you need

(a) a closed conducting loop, and

(b) an external magnetic flux through the loop that is

changing in time.

1. Determine whether the magnetic flux

(£B = BA cos u)
inside the loop is decreasing, increasing, or unchanged.

2. The  magnetic  field  due  to  the  induced  current:
(a) points in the same direction as the external field if
the flux is decreasing; (b) points in the opposite direc-
tion from the external field if the flux is increasing;
or (c) is zero if the flux is not changing.

3. Once you know the direction of the induced magnetic
field, use right-hand-rule-1 (page 563, Chapter 20) to
find the direction of the induced current.

4. Always  keep  in  mind  that  there  are  two  magnetic
fields: (1)  an  external  field  whose  flux  must  be
changing  if  it  is  to  induce  an  electric  current, and
(2) a magnetic field produced by the induced current.

 S

S N

B
B

(a)
Pulling a round loop to
the right out of a magnetic
field which points out
of the page

(b)
Shrinking a loop
in a magnetic
field pointing
into the page

FIGURE 21–8 Example 21–3.

(c)
S magnetic pole
moving from below,
up toward the loop

(d)
N magnetic pole
moving toward loop
in the plane
of the loop

(e)
Rotating the loop by pulling
the left side toward
us and pushing the right
side in; the magnetic field
points from right to left

CONCEPTUAL EXAMPLE 21;3
Practice with Lenz’s law. In which direc-
tion is the current, induced in the circular loop for each situation in Fig. 21–8?

RESPONSE In (a), the magnetic field initially pointing out of the page passes
through the loop. If you pull the loop out of the field, magnetic flux through the
loop  decreases; so  the  induced  current  will  be  in  a direction  to  maintain  the
decreasing  flux  through  the  loop: the  current  will  be  counterclockwise  to
produce a magnetic field outward (toward the reader).
(b) The external field is into the page. The coil area gets smaller, so the flux will
decrease; hence the induced current will be clockwise, producing its own field
into the page to make up for the flux decrease.
(c) Magnetic  field  lines  point  into  the  S  pole  of  a magnet, so  as  the  magnet
moves  toward  us  and  the  loop, the  magnet’s  field  points  into  the  page  and  is
getting stronger. The current in the loop will be induced in the counterclock-
wise direction in order to produce a field  out of the page.
(d) The field is in the plane of the loop, so no magnetic field lines pass through
the loop and the flux through the loop is zero throughout the process; hence
there is no change in flux and no induced emf or current in the loop.
(e) Initially there is no flux through the loop. When you start to rotate the loop,
the external field through the loop begins increasing to the left. To counteract
this  change  in  flux, the  loop  will  have  current  induced  in  a counterclockwise
direction so as to produce its own field to the right.

B
B

C A U T I O N
Magnetic field created by induced
current opposes change in external
flux, not necessarily opposing
the external field

594 CHAPTER 21

t = 0,

R = 100 (cid:3),

l = 5.00 cm

B = 0.600 T,

and total resistance

EXAMPLE 21;4
Pulling a coil from a magnetic field. A 100-loop square
coil of wire, with side
is positioned
as shown in Fig. 21–9.
perpendicular to a uniform magnetic field
B
B
It is quickly pulled from the field at constant speed (moving perpendicular to  )
to a region where B drops abruptly to zero. At
the right edge of the coil is
at the edge of the field. It takes 0.100 s for the whole coil to reach the field-free
region. Determine (a) the rate of change in flux through one loop of the coil,
and (b) the total emf and current induced in the 100-loop coil. (c) How much
)?
energy is dissipated in the coil? (d) What was the average force required
= BA cos 0° = BA,
APPROACH We start by finding how the magnetic flux,
¢t = 0.100 s.
Faraday’s  law  then  gives  the
changes  during  the  time  interval
induced emf and Ohm’s law gives the current.
SOLUTION (a) The coil’s area is
The flux through one loop is initially
1.50 * 10–3 Wb.
stant (because the coil is square), and for one loop is equal to

2.50 * 10–3 m2.
A2.50 * 10–3 m2B =
After 0.100 s, the flux is zero. The rate of change in flux is con-

A = l2 = A5.00 * 10–2 mB2 =

= BA = (0.600 T)

£
B

£
B

(F

ext

¢£
B
¢t

=

0 - A1.50 * 10–3 WbB
0.100 s

= –1.50 * 10–2 Wb(cid:2)s.

(b) The emf induced (Eq. 21–2) in the 100-loop coil during this 0.100-s interval
is

e = –N

¢£
B
¢t

= –(100)A –1.50 * 10–2 Wb(cid:2)sB = 1.50 V.

The current is found by applying Ohm’s law to the

100-(cid:3)

coil:

B = 0.600 T

B = 0

B
F
   ext

B
F
   M

5.00 cm

FIGURE 21–9 Example 21–4.
The square coil in a magnetic field
B = 0.600 T
is pulled abruptly to
B = 0.
the right to a region where
(The forces shown are discussed in
the alternate solution at the end of
Example 21–4.)

I =

e
R

= 1.50 V
100 (cid:3)

= 1.50 * 10–2 A = 15.0 mA.

FIGURE 21–10 Exercise B.

By Lenz’s law, the current must be clockwise to produce more
and thus oppose the decreasing flux into the page.
(c) The total energy dissipated in the coil is the product of the power
and the time:

B
B

into the page

A=  I2RB

E = Pt = I2Rt = A1.50 * 10–2 AB2(100 (cid:3))(0.100 s) = 2.25 * 10–3 J.

(d) We can use the result of part (c) and apply the work-energy principle: the
energy dissipated E is equal to the work W needed to pull the coil out of the
field (Chapter 6). Because

d = 5.00 cm,

where

then

fext =

W
d

W = fext d
= 2.25 * 10–3 J
5.00 * 10–2 m

= 0.0450 N.

B
B

, F = IlB.

Alternate Solution (d) We can also calculate the force directly using Eq. 20–2
The  force  the  magnetic  field  exerts  on  the  top  and
for  constant
bottom sections of the square coil of Fig. 21–9 are in opposite directions and
B
F
cancel each other. The magnetic force
exerted on the left vertical section of
M
the square coil acts to the left as shown because the current is up (clockwise).
B = 0.
B
Hence  the  external
The  right  side  of  the  loop  is  in  the  region  where
B
needed to just overcome the magnetic force to the left
ext ,
F
force to the right,
N = 100 loops
), is
(on

I increasing

(a)

I decreasing

(b)

(c)

I constant

Fext = NIlB = (100)(0.0150 A)(0.0500 m)(0.600 T) = 0.0450 N,

which is the same answer, confirming our use of energy conservation above.

I increasing

EXERCISE B What is the direction of the induced current in the circular loop due to the
current shown in each part of Fig. 21–10?

(d)

SECTION 21–2 Faraday’s Law of Induction; Lenz’s Law 595

l

vB

ΔA

B
B

(outward)

Δv

t

(a)

Force on
electron

vB

–

–

+

(b)

conductor in a uniform
that points out of

FIGURE 21–11 (a) A conducting
rod is moved to the right on a
U-shaped
B
magnetic field
B
the page. The induced current is
clockwise. (b) Upward force on an
electron in the metal rod (moving to
B
B
the right) due to  pointing out of
the page; hence electrons can collect
at the top of the rod, leaving
± charge

at the bottom.

FIGURE 21–12 Example 21–5.

21–3 EMF Induced in a Moving Conductor

Another way to induce an emf is shown in Fig. 21–11a, and this situation helps
B
B
illuminate the nature of the induced emf. Assume that a uniform magnetic field
conductor and the movable
is perpendicular to the area bounded by the
rod resting on it. If the rod is made to move at a speed
to the right, it travels a
Therefore, the  area  of  the  loop  increases  by
distance
an amount
By Faraday’s law there is an induced
e
emf  whose magnitude is given by

in  a time
¢A = l ¢x = lv ¢t

¢t.
in a time

¢x = v ¢t

U-shaped

¢t.

v

e =

¢£
B
¢t

=

B ¢A
¢t

=

Blv ¢t
¢t

= Blv.

(21;3)

The induced current is clockwise (to counter the increasing flux).

v

vB ⊥ B
,

each electron feels a force

Equation 21–3 is valid as long as B,

l,
and  are mutually perpendicular. (If they
are not, we use only the components of each that are mutually perpendicular.) An emf
induced on a conductor moving in a magnetic field is sometimes called motional emf.
We can also obtain Eq. 21–3 without using Faraday’s law. We saw in Chapter 20
v
that a charged particle moving with speed  perpendicular to a magnetic field B
F = qvB
(Eq. 20–4). When the rod of Fig. 21–11a moves to
experiences a force
v,
the electrons in the rod also move with this speed. Therefore,
the right with speed
B
which acts up the page as the red
since
arrow in Fig. 21–11b shows. If the rod is not in contact with the
U-shaped
conductor,
electrons would collect at the upper end of the rod, leaving the lower end positive
(see signs in Fig. 21–11b). There must thus be an induced emf. If the rod is in
U.
contact with the
There will then be a clockwise (conventional) current in the loop. To calculate the
emf, we determine the work W needed to move a charge q from one end of the rod
(qvB)(l).
to the other against this potential difference:
qvBl(cid:2)q = Blv,
The emf equals the work done per unit charge, so
the same result as from Faraday’s law above, Eq. 21–3.

conductor (Fig. 21–11a), the electrons will flow into the

W = force * distance =
e = W(cid:2)q =

F = qvB,

U-shaped

EXERCISE C In what direction will the electrons flow in Fig. 21–11 if the rod moves to
the left, decreasing the area of the current loop?

5 * 10–5 T

Does a moving airplane develop a large emf?
in a region where the Earth’s magnetic field is
and is nearly vertical (Fig. 21–12). What is the potential differ-

EXAMPLE 21;5 ESTIMATE
1000 km(cid:2)h
An airplane travels
about
ence induced between the wing tips that are 70 m apart?
APPROACH We consider the wings to be a 70-m-long conductor moving through
the Earth’s magnetic field. We use Eq. 21–3 to get the emf.
vB ⊥ B
SOLUTION Since
,

v = 1000 km(cid:2)h = 280 m(cid:2)s,

we have

and

B

e

NOTE Not much to worry about.

e = Blv = A5 * 10–5 TB(70 m)(280 m(cid:2)s) L 1 V.

P H Y S I C S   A P P L I E D
Blood-flow measurement

FIGURE 21–13 Measurement of
blood velocity from the induced emf.
Example 21–6.

N

l

S

Voltmeter

vB

596 CHAPTER 21

EXAMPLE 21;6
Electromagnetic blood-flow measurement. The rate of
blood flow in our body’s vessels can be measured using the apparatus shown in
Fig. 21–13, since blood contains charged ions. Suppose that the blood vessel is
2.0 mm in diameter, the magnetic field is 0.080 T, and the measured emf is 0.10 mV.
What is the flow velocity  of the blood?
APPROACH The magnetic field  points horizontally from left to right (N pole
toward S pole). The induced emf acts over the width
of the blood
vessel, perpendicular to  and  (Fig. 21–13), just as in Fig. 21–11. We can then
use Eq. 21–3 to get
SOLUTION We solve for

in Eq. 21–3:

l = 2.0 mm

B
B

v.

B

vB

v

v

B

v =

e
Bl

A1.0 * 10–4 VB
(0.080 T)A2.0 * 10–3 mB
NOTE In actual practice, an alternating current is used to produce an alternating
magnetic field. The induced emf is then alternating.

= 0.63 m(cid:2)s.

=

21–4 Changing Magnetic Flux
Produces an Electric Field
We have seen that a changing magnetic flux induces an emf. In a closed loop of
wire there will also be an induced current, which implies there is an electric field
in the wire causing the electrons to start moving. Indeed, this and other results
suggest the important conclusion that

a changing magnetic flux produces an electric field.

This result applies not only to wires and other conductors, but is a general result
that  applies  to  any  region  in  space. Indeed, an  electric  field  will  be  produced
(=  induced)

at any point in space where there is a changing magnetic field.

We can get a simple formula for E in terms of B for the case of electrons in
a moving  conductor, as  in  Fig. 21–11. The  electrons  feel  a force  (upwards  in
Fig. 21–11b); and if we put ourselves in the reference frame of the conductor, this
force  accelerating  the  electrons  implies  that  there  is  an  electric  field  in  the
conductor. Electric field is defined as the force per unit charge,
where
here

(Eq. 20–4). Thus the effective field E in the rod must be

E = F(cid:2)q,

F = qvB

E =

F
q

=

qvB
q

= vB,

which is a useful result.

(21;4)

21–5 Electric Generators

We discussed alternating currents (ac) briefly in Section 18–7. Now we examine
how ac is generated: by an electric generator or dynamo. A generator transforms
mechanical energy into electric energy, just the opposite of what a motor does
(Section 20–10). A simplified diagram of an ac generator is shown in Fig. 21–14.
A  generator  consists  of  many  loops  of  wire  (only  one  is  shown)  wound  on  an
armature that can rotate in a magnetic field. The axle is turned by some mechan-
ical means (falling water, steam turbine, car motor belt), and an emf is induced in
the rotating coil. An electric current is thus the output of a generator. Suppose in
Fig. 21–14 that the armature is rotating clockwise; then right-hand-rule-3 (p. 568)
applied  to  charged  particles  in  the  wire  (or  Lenz’s  law)  tells  us  that  the
(conventional) current in the wire labeled b on the armature is outward towards us;
therefore the current is outward through brush b. (Each brush is fixed and presses
against  a  continuous  slip  ring  that  rotates  with  the  armature.) After  one-half
revolution, wire b will be where wire a is now in Fig. 21–14, and the current then
at brush b will be inward. Thus the current produced is alternating.

The frequency f is 60 Hz for general use in the United States and Canada,
whereas  50 Hz  is  used  in  many  countries. Most  of  the  power  generated  in  the
United States is done at steam plants, where the burning of fossil fuels (coal, oil,
natural  gas)  boils  water  to  produce  high-pressure  steam  that  turns  a turbine
connected  to  the  generator  axle  (Fig. 15–21). Turbines  can  also  be  turned  by
water  pressure  at  a  dam  (hydroelectric). At  nuclear  power  plants, the  nuclear
energy released is used to produce steam to turn turbines. Indeed, a heat engine
(Chapter  15)  connected  to  a generator  is  the  principal  means  of  generating
electric power. The frequency of 60 Hz or 50 Hz is maintained very precisely by
power companies.

A dc  generator is  much  like  an  ac  generator, except  the  slip  rings  are
replaced by split-ring commutators, Fig. 21–15a, just as in a dc motor (Figs. 20–37
and 20–38). The output of such a generator is as shown and can be smoothed out
by placing a capacitor in parallel with the output.† More common is the use of
many armature windings, as in Fig. 21–15b, which produces a smoother output.

Axle rotated
mechanically

Armature

I

b

N

a

I

a

I

I

b

Brushes

S

Slip rings

FIGURE 21–14 An ac generator.

FIGURE 21–15 (a) A dc generator
with one set of commutators, and
(b) a dc generator with many sets of
commutators and windings.

V

(a)

V

(b)

t

t

†A capacitor tends to store charge and, if the time constant RC
is  long  enough, helps  to  smooth  out  the  voltage  as  shown  in
the figure to the right.

V

t

SECTION 21–5 Electric Generators

597

Engine
belt

Current to
produce
B field

Slip
rings

N

S

Stator coil (emf induced in)

Loops of wire
(in which current is induced)

Output
current
(induced)

Input
current

South
pole

North
pole

N

S

Engine
belt

S

(Rotating
electromagnet)

N

N

S

S

Rotor

Rotates

(b)

Stator assembly

Slip
rings

Coil
(produces B)

Stator coil (emf induced in)

(a)

FIGURE 21–16 (a) Simplified schematic diagram of an alternator. The input current to the rotor from the battery is
connected through continuous slip rings. Sometimes the rotor electromagnet is replaced by a permanent magnet (no input
current). (b) Actual shape of an alternator. The rotor is made to turn by a belt from the engine. The current in the wire coil
of the rotor produces a magnetic field inside it on its axis that points horizontally from left to right (not shown), thus making
north and south poles of the plates attached at either end. These end plates are made with triangular fingers that are bent
over the coil—hence there are alternating N and S poles quite close to one another, with magnetic field lines between
them as shown by the blue lines. As the rotor turns, these field lines pass through the fixed stator coils (shown on the
right for clarity, but in operation the rotor rotates within the stator), inducing a current in them, which is the output.

P H Y S I C S   A P P L I E D
Alternators

FIGURE 21–17 The emf is induced
in the segments ab and cd, whose
velocity components perpendicular
B
to the field  are v sin u.
B
vB
vB
  ⊥
a
I (induced)

θ

b
θ

N

Axis

B
B

S

c
I (induced)

vB

d

598 CHAPTER 21

*

Alternators
Automobiles used to use dc generators. Today they mainly use alternators, which
avoid  the  problems  of  wear  and  electrical  arcing  (sparks)  across  the  split-ring
commutators of dc generators. Alternators differ from generators in that an electro-
magnet, called the rotor, is fed by current from the battery and is made to rotate
by a belt from the engine. The magnetic field of the turning rotor passes through
a surrounding set of stationary coils called the  stator (Fig. 21–16), inducing an
alternating current in the stator coils, which is the output. This ac output is changed
to dc for charging the battery by the use of semiconductor diodes, which allow
current flow in one direction only.

Deriving the Generator Equation
Figure  21–17  shows  the  wire  loop  on  a generator  armature. The  loop  is  being
made to rotate clockwise in a uniform magnetic field  The velocity of the two
lengths ab and cd at this instant are shown. Although the sections of wire bc and da
are moving, the force on electrons in these sections is toward the side of the wire,
not along the wire’s length. The emf generated is thus due only to the force on
charges in the sections ab and cd. From right-hand-rule-3, we see that the direc-
tion of the induced current in ab is from a toward b. And in the lower section,
it is from c to d; so the flow is continuous in the loop. The magnitude of the emf
generated in ab is given by Eq. 21–3, except that we must take the component
of the velocity perpendicular to B:

B
.
B

e = Blv⊥ ,

l

is the length of ab. From Fig. 21–17 we see that

where
is
the angle the loop’s face makes with the vertical. The emf induced in cd has the same
magnitude and is in the same direction. Therefore their emfs add, and the total emf is

v⊥ = v sin u,

where

u

e = 2NBlv sin u,

where we have multiplied by N, the number of loops in the coil.

If the coil is rotating with constant angular velocity

From the angular equations (Eq. 8–4),
the rotation axis and h is the length of bc or ad. Thus

u = vt.
v,
where r is the distance from
e = 2NBvl(h(cid:2)2) sin vt,
or
e = NBvA sin vt,
(21;5)
is the area of the loop. This equation holds for any shape coil, not just

v = vr = v(h(cid:2)2),

then the angle

A = lh

where

v = 2pf,

for a rectangle as derived. Thus, the output emf of the generator is sinusoidally alter-
nating (see Fig. 21–18 and Section 18–7). Since
is expressed in radians per second,
we can write
). The rms output (see
Section 18–7, Eq. 18–8b) is
Vrms = NBvA
22

where f is the frequency (in

Hz = s–1

v

.

An ac generator. The armature of a 60-Hz ac generator
how

EXAMPLE 21;7
2.0 * 10–2 m2,
rotates in a 0.15-T magnetic field. If the area of the coil is
e
= 170 V?
many loops must the coil contain if the peak output is to be
0
e
APPROACH From Eq. 21–5 we see that the maximum emf is
0
SOLUTION We solve Eq. 21–5 for N with
e
0
BAv

v = 2pf = (6.28)A60 s–1B = 377 s–1:
170 V
(0.15 T)A2.0 * 10–2 m2BA377 s–1B

= 150 turns.

= NBAv.

N =

=

21–6 Back EMF and Counter Torque;

Eddy Currents

Back EMF, in a Motor
A motor turns and produces mechanical energy when a current is made to flow in
it. From our description in Section 20–10 of a simple dc motor, you might expect
that the armature would accelerate indefinitely due to the torque on it. However,
as the armature of the motor turns, the magnetic flux through the coil changes
and an emf is generated. This induced emf acts to oppose the motion (Lenz’s law)
and is called the back emf or counter emf. The greater the speed of the motor,
the greater the back emf. A motor normally turns and does work on something,
but if there were no load to push (or rotate), the motor’s speed would increase until
the back emf equaled the input voltage. When there is a mechanical load, the speed
of the motor may be limited also by the load. The back emf will then be less than
the external applied voltage. The greater the mechanical load, the slower the motor
rotates and the lower is the back emf  (

Eq. 21–5).

e r v,

EXAMPLE 21;8
Back emf in a motor. The armature windings of a dc motor
5.0 (cid:3).
have a resistance of
The motor is connected to a 120-V line, and when the
motor reaches full speed against its normal load, the back emf is 108 V. Calculate
(a) the current into the motor when it is just starting up, and (b) the current when
the motor reaches full speed.
APPROACH As the motor is just starting up, it is turning very slowly, so there
is negligible back emf. The only voltage is the 120-V line. The current is given by
R = 5.0 (cid:3).
Ohm’s law with
At full speed, we must include as emfs both the 120-V
applied emf and the opposing back emf.
SOLUTION (a) At start up, the current is controlled by the 120 V applied to the
coil’s

resistance. By Ohm’s law,

5.0-(cid:3)

I =

V
R

= 120 V
5.0 (cid:3)

= 24 A.

(b) When the motor is at full speed, the back emf must be included in the equivalent
circuit shown in Fig. 21–19. In this case, Ohm’s law (or Kirchhoff’s rule) gives

Therefore

120 V - 108 V = I(5.0 (cid:3)).

I = 12 V
5.0 (cid:3)

= 2.4 A.

NOTE This result shows that the current can be very high when a motor first
starts up. This is why the lights in your house may dim when the motor of the
refrigerator (or other large motor) starts up. The large initial refrigerator current
causes the voltage to the lights to drop because the house wiring has resistance
and there is some voltage drop across it when large currents are drawn.

emf
e

0

0

Time

FIGURE 21–18 An ac generator
produces an alternating current. The
output emf
e
= NAvB
0

0 sin vt,
e = e
(Eq. 21–5).

where

FIGURE 21–19 Circuit of a motor
showing induced back emf.
Example 21–8.

Windings
of motor

5.0 Ω

Back emf
induced in
armature winding

e

induced

= 108 V

e

= 120 V

SECTION 21–6 599

P H Y S I C S   A P P L I E D
Burning out a motor

CONCEPTUAL EXAMPLE 21;9
Motor overload. When using an appliance
such as a blender, electric drill, or sewing machine, if the appliance is overloaded
or jammed so that the motor slows appreciably or stops while the power is still
connected, the motor can burn out and be ruined. Explain why this happens.

RESPONSE The motors are designed to run at a certain speed for a given applied
voltage, and the designer must take the expected back emf into account. If the
e r v,
rotation speed is reduced, the back emf will not be as high as expected (
Eq. 21–5). The  current  will  increase  and  may  become  large  enough  that  the
windings of the motor heat up and may melt, ruining the motor.

Counter Torque, in a Generator
In a generator, the situation is the reverse of that for a motor. As we saw, the
mechanical  turning  of  the  armature  induces  an  emf  in  the  loops, which  is  the
output. If  the  generator  rotates  but  is  not  connected  to  an  external  circuit,
the emf exists at the terminals but there is no current. In this case, it takes little effort
to turn the armature. But if the generator is connected to a device that draws cur-
rent, then a current flows in the coils of the armature. Because this current-carrying
coil is in an external magnetic field, there will be a torque exerted on it (as in
a motor), and this torque opposes the motion (use right-hand-rule-2, page 568,
for the force on a wire in Fig. 21–14 or 21–17). This is called a counter torque.
The  greater  the  electrical  load—that  is, the  more  current  that  is  drawn—the
greater will be the counter torque. Hence the external applied torque will have to
be greater to keep the generator turning. This makes sense from the conservation
of energy principle. More mechanical energy input is needed to produce more
electric energy output.

EXERCISE D A bicycle headlight is powered by a generator that is turned by the bicycle
wheel. (a) If you speed up, how does the power to the light change? (b) Does the gener-
ator resist being turned as the bicycle’s speed increases, and if so how?

Eddy Currents
Induced currents are not always confined to well-defined paths such as in wires.
Consider, for example, the rotating metal wheel in Fig. 21–20a. An external mag-
netic field is applied to a limited area of the wheel as shown and points into the
page. The section of wheel in the magnetic field has an emf induced in it because the
conductor is moving, carrying electrons with it. The flow of induced (conventional)
current in the wheel is upward in the region of the magnetic field (Fig. 21–20b),
and  the  current  follows  a downward  return  path  outside  that  region. Why?
According to Lenz’s law, the induced currents oppose the change that causes them.
Consider the part of the rotating wheel labeled c in Fig. 21–20b, where the magnetic
field is zero but is just about to enter a region where  points into the page. To oppose
this  inward  increase  in  magnetic  field, the  induced  current  is  counterclockwise
to produce a field pointing out of the page (right-hand-rule-1). Similarly, region d is
about to move to e, where
is zero; hence the current is clockwise to produce an
inward field opposed to this decreasing flux inward. These currents are referred
to as eddy currents. They can be present in any conductor that is moving across
a magnetic field or through which the magnetic flux is changing.

B
B

B
B

In Fig. 21–20b, the magnetic field exerts a force  on the induced currents it
has created, and that force opposes the rotational motion. Eddy currents can be
used in this way as a smooth braking device on, say, a rapid-transit car. In order
to stop the car, an electromagnet can be turned on that applies its field either to
the wheels or to the moving steel rail below. Eddy currents can also be used to
dampen  (reduce)  the  oscillation  of  a vibrating  system, which  is  referred  to  as
magnetic damping.

B
F

B
    (inward)
B

(a)

B
F

c

ed

(b)

FIGURE 21–20 Production of eddy
currents in a rotating wheel. The
gray lines in (b) indicate induced
current.

600 CHAPTER 21 Electromagnetic Induction and Faraday’s Law

Eddy currents, however, can be a problem. For example, eddy currents induced
in the armature of a motor or generator produce heat
and waste energy.
To reduce the eddy currents, the armatures are laminated; that is, they are made of
very  thin  sheets  of  iron  that  are  well  insulated  from  one  another  (used  also  in
transformers, Fig. 21–23). The total path length of the eddy currents is confined
to each slab, which increases the total resistance; hence the current is less and
there is less wasted energy.

(P = Ie)

Walk-through metal detectors (Fig. 21–21) use electromagnetic induction and
eddy currents to detect metal objects. Several coils are situated in the walls of the
walk-through at different heights. In one technique, the coils are given brief pulses
of  current, hundreds  or  thousands  of  times  per  second. When  a person  passes
through the walk-through, any metal object being carried will have eddy currents
induced in it, and the small magnetic field produced by that eddy current can be
detected, setting off an alert or alarm.

21–7 Transformers and

Transmission of Power
A transformer is a device for increasing or decreasing an ac voltage. Transformers
are found everywhere: on utility poles (Fig. 21–22) to reduce the high voltage from
the electric company to a usable voltage in houses (120 V or 240 V), in chargers for
cell phones, laptops, and other electrical devices, in your car to give the needed
high voltage to the spark plugs, and in many other applications. A transformer
consists  of  two  coils  of  wire  known  as  the  primary and secondary coils. The
two coils can be interwoven (with insulated wire); or they can be linked by an
iron  core  which  is  laminated  to  minimize  eddy-current  losses  (Section  21–6),
as shown in Fig. 21–23. Transformers are designed so that (nearly) all the mag-
netic  flux  produced  by  the  current  in  the  primary  coil  also  passes  through
the  secondary  coil, and  we  assume  this  is  true  in  what  follows. We  also
assume that energy losses (in resistance and hysteresis) can be ignored—a good
approximation for real transformers, which are often better than 99% efficient.

When  an  ac  voltage  is  applied  to  the  primary  coil, the  changing  magnetic
field it produces will induce an ac voltage of the same frequency in the secondary
coil. However, the voltage will be different according to the number of “turns” or
loops  in  each  coil. From  Faraday’s  law, the  voltage  or  emf  induced  in  the
secondary coil is

VS = NS

¢£
B
¢t

,

FIGURE 21–21 Metal detector.

P H Y S I C S   A P P L I E D

Metal detector

FIGURE 21–22 Repairing a step-
down transformer on a utility pole.

(cid:2)¢t
¢£
B

is the rate at

FIGURE 21–23 Step-up transformer
ANP = 4,  NS = 12B.

is the number of turns in the secondary coil, and

NS

where
which the magnetic flux changes.
The input primary voltage,

VP ,

is related to the rate at which the flux changes

through it,

VP = NP

¢£
B
¢t

,

NP

is  the  number  of  turns  in  the  primary  coil. This  follows  because  the
where
in  the  primary  that  balances
changing  flux  produces  a back  emf,
if the resistance of the primary can be ignored (Kirchhoff’s
the applied voltage
rules). We divide these two equations, assuming little or no flux is lost, to find

NP ¢£
B

(cid:2)¢t,

VP

Secondary
coil

VS
(output)

Primary
coil

VP
(input)

NP
turns

NS
turns

VS
VP

=

NS
NP

.

(21;6)

Laminated
iron core

This transformer equation tells how the secondary (output) voltage is related to
VP
in  Eq. 21–6  can  be  the  rms  values
the  primary  (input)  voltage;
(Section 18–7) for both, or peak values for both. Steady dc voltages don’t work
in a transformer because there would be no changing magnetic flux.

and

VS

SECTION 21–7 Transformers and Transmission of Power

601

If the secondary coil contains more loops than the primary coil

ANS 7 NPB,
we have a step-up transformer. The secondary voltage is greater than the primary
voltage. For example, if the secondary coil has twice as many turns as the primary
is
coil, then the secondary voltage will be twice that of the primary voltage. If
less than

we have a step-down transformer.

NP ,

NS

Although ac voltage can be increased (or decreased) with a transformer, we
don’t  get  something  for  nothing. Energy  conservation  tells  us  that  the  power
output can be no greater than the power input. A well-designed transformer can
be greater than 99% efficient, so little energy is lost to heat. The power output
(Eq. 18–5), we have
thus essentially equals the power input. Since power

P = IV

IP VP = IS VS ,

or (remembering Eq. 21–6),

IS
IP

=

NP
NS

.

(21;7)

EXAMPLE 21;10
Cell phone charger. The charger for a cell phone contains a
transformer that reduces 120-V (or 240-V) ac to 5.0-V ac to charge the 3.7-V
battery (Section 19–4). (It also contains diodes to change the 5.0-V ac to 5.0-V dc.)
Suppose the secondary coil contains 30 turns and the charger supplies 700 mA.
Calculate (a) the number of turns in the primary coil, (b) the current in the
primary, and (c) the power transformed.
APPROACH We assume the transformer is ideal, with no flux loss, so we can use
Eq. 21–6 and then Eq. 21–7.
SOLUTION (a) This is a step-down transformer, and from Eq. 21–6 we have

NP = NS

VP
VS

=

(30)(120 V)
(5.0 V)

= 720 turns.

(b) From Eq. 21–7

IP = IS

NS
NP

= (0.70 A) ¢ 30
720

≤ = 29 mA.

(c) The power transformed is

P = IS VS = (0.70 A)(5.0 V) = 3.5 W.

NOTE The  power  in  the  primary  coil,
is  the
same  as  the  power  in  the  secondary  coil. There  is  100% efficiency  in  power
transfer for our ideal transformer.

P = (0.029 A)(120 V) = 3.5 W,

VP
 12 V

Switch
closed

0

Switch
opened

(a)

Time

Time

VS
10 kV
0
(cid:3)10 kV
(cid:3)20 kV
FIGURE 21–24 A dc voltage turned
on and off as shown in (a) produces
voltage pulses in the secondary (b).
Voltage scales in (a) and (b) are not
the same.

(b)

P H Y S I C S   A P P L I E D
Car ignition system

EXERCISE E How many turns would you want in the secondary coil of a transformer
having

if it were to reduce the voltage from 120-V ac to 3.0-V ac?

NP = 400 turns

A transformer operates only on ac. A dc current in the primary coil does not
produce a changing flux and therefore induces no emf in the secondary. How-
ever, if a dc voltage is applied to the primary through a switch, at the instant the
switch is opened or closed there will be an induced voltage in the secondary. For
example, if  the  dc  is  turned  on  and  off  as  shown  in  Fig. 21–24a, the  voltage
induced in the secondary is as shown in Fig. 21–24b. Notice that the secondary
voltage drops to zero when the dc voltage is steady. This is basically how, in the
ignition system of an automobile, the high voltage is created to produce the spark
across the gap of a spark plug that ignites the gas-air mixture. The transformer is
referred to as an “ignition coil,” and transforms the 12 V dc of the battery (when
switched off in the primary) into a spike of as much as 30 kV in the secondary.

602 CHAPTER 21 Electromagnetic Induction and Faraday’s Law

High voltage
transmission line

Power
plant

Step-up
transformer

Step-down
transformer
(substation)

Step-down
transformer

Home

12,000 V

240,000 V

7200 V 240 V

FIGURE 21–25 The transmission of electric power from power plants to homes makes use of transformers
at various stages.

Transformers play an important role in the transmission of electricity. Power
plants  are  often  situated  some  distance  from  metropolitan  areas, so  electricity
must then be transmitted over long distances (Fig. 21–25). There is always some
power loss in the transmission lines, and this loss can be minimized if the power is
transmitted at high voltage, using transformers, as the following Example shows.

P H Y S I C S   A P P L I E D

Transformers help power
transmission

0.40 (cid:3).

EXAMPLE 21;11
Transmission lines. An average of 120 kW of electric
power is sent to a small town from a power plant 10 km away. The transmission
lines have a total resistance of
Calculate the power loss if the power is
transmitted at (a) 240 V and (b) 24,000 V.
P = V2(cid:2)R
APPROACH We  cannot  use
because  if  R is  the  resistance  of  the
transmission lines, we don’t know the voltage drop along them. The given voltages
are applied across the lines plus the load (the town). But we can determine the
for
current I in the lines
both cases (a) and (b).
SOLUTION (a) If 120 kW is sent at 240 V, the total current will be

and then find the power loss from

PL = I2R,

(=  P(cid:2)V),

The power loss in the lines,

I =

P
V

= 1.2 * 105 W
2.4 * 102 V
is then
PL = I2R = (500 A)2(0.40 (cid:3)) = 100 kW.

= 500 A.

PL ,

Thus, over 80% of all the power would be wasted as heat in the power lines!
(b) If 120 kW is sent at 24,000 V, the total current will be
= 1.2 * 105 W
2.4 * 104 V

= 5.0 A.

P
V

I =

The power loss in the lines is then

PL = I2R = (5.0 A)2(0.40 (cid:3)) = 10 W,

1
100

of 1%: a far better efficiency.

which is less than
NOTE We  see  that  the  higher  voltage  results  in  less  current, and  thus  less
power is wasted as heat in the transmission lines. It is for this reason that power
is usually transmitted at very high voltages, as high as 700 kV.

The great advantage of ac, and a major reason it is in nearly universal use†, is
that the voltage can easily be stepped up or down by a transformer. The output
voltage of an electric generating plant is stepped up prior to transmission. Upon
arrival in a city, it is stepped down in stages at electric substations prior to distri-
bution. The voltage in lines along city streets is typically 2400 V or 7200 V and is
stepped down to 240 V or 120 V for home use by transformers (Figs. 21–22 and 21–25).

†DC transmission along wires does exist, and has some advantages (if the current is constant, there is
no induced current in nearby conductors as there is with ac). But boosting to high voltage and down
again at the receiving end requires more complicated electronics.

SECTION 21–7 Transformers and Transmission of Power

603

P H Y S I C S   A P P L I E D
Charging phones,
cars, etc., by
induction

d

Primary coil
(in charger base)

Secondary coil
(in toothbrush)
I (cid:4)I0 sin 2pft

FIGURE 21–26 This electric
toothbrush contains rechargeable
batteries which are being recharged
as it sits on its base. Charging occurs
from a primary coil in the base to a
secondary coil in the toothbrush. The
toothbrush can be lifted from its base
when you want to brush your teeth.

P H Y S I C S   A P P L I E D
Hard drive

Wireless Transmission of Power—Inductive Charging
Many devices with rechargeable batteries, like cell phones, cordless phones, and even
electric cars, can be recharged using a direct metal contact between the device
and the charger. But devices can also be charged “wirelessly” by induction, with-
out  the  need  for  exposed  electric  contacts. The  electric  toothbrush  shown  in
Fig. 21–26 sits on a plastic base. Inside the base is a “primary coil” connected to an
ac outlet. Inside the toothbrush is a “secondary coil” in which a current is induced
due to the changing magnetic field produced by the changing current in the primary
coil. The current induced in the secondary coil charges the rechargeable batteries.
(Not an option for ordinary AA or AAA batteries which are not rechargeable.) The
effect is like a transformer—except here there is no iron to contain the field lines, so
there is less efficiency. But you can separate the two parts (toothbrush and charger)
and brush your teeth. Many heart pacemakers are given power inductively: power
in an external coil is transmitted to a secondary coil in the pacemaker (Fig. 19–25)
inside  the  person’s  body  near  the  heart. Inductive  charging  is  also  a possible
means for recharging an electric car’s batteries.

Wireless transmission of power must be done over short distances to maintain
a reasonable efficiency. Wireless transmission of signals (information) can be done
over great distances (Section 22–7) because even fairly low power signals can be
detected, and it is the information in the signal voltages that counts, not power.

*

21–8 Information Storage: Magnetic and
Semiconductor; Tape, Hard Drive, RAM

*

Magnetic Storage: Read/Write on Tape and Disks
Recording  and  playback  on  tape  or  disk  is  done  by  magnetic  heads. Magnetic
tapes contain a thin layer of ferromagnetic oxide on a thin plastic tape. Computer
hard drives (HD) store digital information (applications and data): they have a
thin layer of ferromagnetic material on the surface of each rotating disk or platter,
Fig. 21–27a. During recording of an audio or video signal on tape, or “writing”
on  a  hard  drive, the  voltage  is  sent  to  the  recording  head  which  acts  as  a tiny
electromagnet (Fig. 21–27b) that magnetizes the tiny section of tape or disk pass-
ing the narrow gap in the head at each instant. During playback, or “reading” of
an  HD, the  changing  magnetism  of  the  moving  tape  or  disk  at  the  gap  causes
corresponding changes in the magnetic field within the soft-iron head, which in
turn induces an emf in the coil (Faraday’s law). This induced emf is the output
signal that can be processed by the computer, or for audio can be amplified and
sent to a loudspeaker (for video to a monitor or TV).

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

FIGURE 21–27 (a) Photo of a hard drive
showing several platters and read write heads
that can quickly move from the edge of the
disk to the center. (b) Read Write
(playback recording) head for disk or tape.
In writing or recording, the electric input signal
to the head, which acts as an electromagnet,
magnetizes the passing tape or disk. In reading
or playback, the changing magnetic field of the
passing tape or disk induces a changing magnetic
field in the head, which in turn induces in the
coil an emf that is the output signal.

Electric signal
input (or output)

Read/Write
head

Coil

Gap

Moving magnetic tape
or rotating disk

(b)

(a)

Audio and video signals may be analog, varying continuously in amplitude over
time: the variation in degree of magnetization at sequential points reflects the varia-
tion in amplitude and frequency of the audio or video signal. In modern equipment,
analog signals (say from a microphone) are electronically converted to digital—which
means a series of bits, each of which is a “1” or a “0”, that forms a binary code
as  discussed  in  Section  17–10. (Recall  also, 8  bits  in  a  row
1  byte.)
Computers process only digital information.

=

604 CHAPTER 21

CD-ROMs, CDs (audio compact discs), and DVDs (digital video discs) are read
by an optical drive (not magnetic): a laser emits a narrow beam of light that reflects
off the “grooves” of the rotating disc containing “pits” as described in Section 28–11.

P H Y S I C S   A P P L I E D

CDs and DVDs

*

Semiconductor Memory: DRAM, Flash
Basic to your computer is its random access memory (RAM). This is where the
information  you  are  working  with  at  any  given  time  is  temporarily  stored  and
manipulated  by  you. Each  data  storage  location  can  be  accessed  and  read
(or  written)  directly  and  quickly, so  you  don’t  have  to  wait. In  contrast, hard
drives, tape, flash and external devices are more permanent storage, and they are
much slower to access because the data must be searched for, sequentially, such
as along the circular tracks of hard drives (Fig. 21–27a). Programs, applications,
and data that you want to use are imported by the computer into the RAM from
their more permanent (and more slowly accessed) storage area.†

RAM is based on semiconductor technology, storing the binary bits (“0” or “1”)
as electric charge or voltage. Some computers may use semiconductors also for
long-term storage (“flash memory”) in place of a hard drive.

A common type of RAM is dynamic random access memory or DRAM, which
uses  arrays  of  transistors  known  as  MOSFETs  (metal-oxide  semiconductor
field-effect transistors). Transistors will be discussed in Section 29–10, but we
already encountered them in Section 17–11 about TV screen addressing, Fig. 17–34,
which  we  show  again  here, Fig. 21–28. A  MOSFET  transistor  in  RAM  serves
basically as an on–off switch: the voltage on the gate terminal acts to control the
conductivity between the source and the drain terminals, thus allowing current
to flow (or not) between them.

=

Each memory “cell,” which in DRAM consists of one transistor and a capacitor,
stores one bit (
a “0” or a “1”). Each cell is extremely small physically, less than
100 nm  across.‡ Typical  DRAM  chips  (integrated  circuits)  contain  billions  of
these memory cells. To see how they work, we look at a tiny part, the simple four-
cell array shown in Fig. 21–29. One side of each cell capacitor is grounded; the
other side is connected to the transistor source. The drain of each transistor is
connected to a very thin conducting wire or “line,” a bit-line, that runs across the
array of cells. Each gate is connected to a word-line. A particular bit is a “1” or
a “0” depending on whether the capacitor of the cell is charged to a voltage V
(maybe 5 V) or is at zero (uncharged, or at a very small voltage).

To write data, say on the upper left cell in Fig. 21–29, word-line-1 is given
a high enough pulse of voltage to “turn on” the transistor. That is, the high gate
voltage attracts charge and allows bit-line-1 and the capacitor to be connected. Thus
charge can flow from bit-line-1 to the capacitor, charging it either to V or to 0,
depending on the bit-line-1 voltage at that moment, thus writing a “1” or a “0”.
The lower left cell in Fig. 21–29 can be written at the same time by setting

bit-line-2 voltage to V or zero.

1
2

V

Now let us see a simple way to read a cell. In order to read the data stored
(“1” or “0”) on the upper left cell, a voltage of about
is given to bit-line-1.
Then word-line-1 is given enough voltage to turn on the transistor and connect
=
bit-line-1  to  the  capacitor. The  capacitor, if  uncharged  ( “0”), will  now  drag
charge from bit-line-1 and the bit-line voltage will drop below
If the capacitor
=V
is already charged to
( “1”), the connection to bit-line-1 will raise bit-line-1’s
voltage to above
V.
A sensor at the end of bit-line-1 will detect either change in
voltage (increase means it reads a “1”, decrease a “0”). All cells connected to one
word-line are read at the same moment. The capacitor voltage has been altered
by the small charge flow during the reading process. So that cell or bit which has
just been read needs to be written again, or “refreshed.”

V.

1
2

1
2

†Computer specifications may use “memory” for the random access (fast) memory, and “storage” for
the long-term (and slower access) information on hard drives, flash drives, and related devices.
‡At  100 nm,
on a side, can hold
than 100 nm: a

So  a square, 1 cm
(gigabyte). Today, cells are even smaller

105 * 105 = 1010 = 10 Gbits L 1 GB

(1 cm(cid:2)100 nm) = 10–2 m(cid:2)10–7 m.

bits  can  fit  along  a 1-cm  line,

in a 1 cm2 area.

cell can hold

(30 nm)2

L 10 GB

105

Gate

Drain

Source

FIGURE 21–28 Symbol for a
MOSFET transistor. The gate acts
to attract or repel charge, and thus
open or close the connection along
the semiconductor that connects
source and drain.

2 * 2

FIGURE 21–29 A tiny
cell,
part of a simple DRAM array. The
word-lines and bit-lines do not touch
each other where they cross.

Word-line 1

Word-line 2

Bit-line 1

Bit-line 2

C

C

C

C

*SECTION 21–8 605

Drain

Floating gate

Gate

r
o
t
c
u
d
n
o
c
i
m
e
S

Insulator

Thin insulator

Source

FIGURE 21–30 A floating gate
nonvolatile memory cell (NVM).

The transistors are imperfect switches and allow the charge on the tiny capac-
itors in each cell to be “leaky” and lose charge fairly quickly, so every cell has to
be read and rewritten (refreshed) many times per second. The D in DRAM stands
for  this “dynamic” refreshing  action. If  the  power  is  turned  off, the  capacitors
lose their charge and the data are lost. DRAM is thus referred to as being volatile
memory, whereas  a hard  drive  keeps  its  (magnetic)  memory  even  when  the
electric power is off and is called nonvolatile memory (doesn’t “evaporate”).

(±20 V)

Flash memory is also made of semiconductor material on tiny “chips.” The
transistor structures are more complicated, and are able to keep the data even
without power so they are nonvolatile. Each MOSFET contains a second gate (the
floating  gate)  insulated  on  both  faces, and  can  hold  charge  for  many  years.
Charged or not corresponds to a “1” or a “0” bit. Figure 21–30 is a diagram of
such an NVM (nonvolatile memory) cell. The floating gate is insulated from the
standard gate and the semiconductor connecting source and drain. A high posi-
tive voltage on the gate
forces electrons in the semiconductor (at 0 V) to
pass  through  the  thin  insulator  into  the  floating  gate  by  a  process  of  quantum
mechanical tunneling (discussed in Section 30–12). This charge is stored on the
floating  gate  as  a “1” bit. The  erase  process  is  done  by  applying  the  opposite
(–20 V)
voltage to force electrons to tunnel out of the floating gate, returning it
a “0” bit). The erase process is slow (milliseconds vs. ns
to the uncharged state (
for  DRAM), so  erasure  is  done  in  large  blocks  of  memory. Flash  memory† is
slower to read or write, and is too slow to use as RAM. Instead, flash memory
can be used in place of a hard drive as general storage in computers and tablets,
and may be called a “solid state device” (SSD). Flash is also used for flash drives,
memory cards (such as SD cards), thumb drives, cell phone and portable player
memory, and external computer memory.

=

Magnetoresistive RAM (MRAM) is a recent development, involving (again)
magnetic properties. One cell (storing one bit) consists of two tiny ferromagnetic
plates  (separated  by  an  insulator), one  of  which  is  permanently  magnetized.
The  other  plate  can  be  magnetized  in  one  direction  or  the  other, for  a “1” or
a “0”, by current in nearby wires. Cell size is a bit large, but MRAM is fast and
nonvolatile (no power and no refresh needed) and therefore has the potential to
be used as any type of memory.

*

21–9 Applications of Induction:

Microphone, Seismograph, GFCI

FIGURE 21–31 Diagram of a
microphone that works by induction.

*

Membrane

Small coil of wire

Magnet

N S

To recorder or amplifier

P H Y S I C S   A P P L I E D
Credit card

Microphone
The condenser microphone was discussed in Section 17–7. Many other types operate
on the principle of induction. In one form, a microphone is just the inverse of a loud-
speaker (Section 20–10). A small coil connected to a membrane is suspended close
to a small permanent magnet, as shown in Fig. 21–31. The coil moves in the magnetic
field when sound waves strike the membrane, and this motion induces an emf in
the moving coil. The frequency of the induced emf will be just that of the impinging
sound  waves, and  this  emf  is  the  “signal” that  can  be  amplified  and  sent  to
loudspeakers or recorder.

*

Credit Card Reader
When you pass a credit card through a reader at a store, the magnetic stripe on
the  back  of  the  card  passes  over  a  read  head  just  as  for  a  computer  hard
drive. The  magnetic  stripe  contains  personal  information  about  your  account
and  connects  by  telephone  line  for  approval  from  your  credit  card  company.
Newer  cards  use  semiconductor  chips  that  are  more  difficult  to  fraudulently
copy.

†Why the name “Flash”? It may come from the erase process: large blocks erased “in a flash,” and or
because  the  earliest  floating  gate  memories  were  erased  by  a  flash  of  UV  light  which  ejected  the
stored electrons.

(cid:2)

606 CHAPTER 21 Electromagnetic Induction and Faraday’s Law

Coil

Suspension
springs

Permanent
magnet

FIGURE 21–32 One type of
seismograph, in which the coil is fixed
to the case and moves with the Earth’s
surface. The magnet, suspended by
springs, has inertia and does not
move instantaneously with the coil
(and case), so there is relative
motion between magnet and coil.

*

*

Seismograph
In geophysics, a seismograph measures the intensity of earthquake waves using a
magnet and a coil of wire. Either the magnet or the coil is fixed to the case, and
the other is inertial (suspended by a spring; Fig. 21–32). The relative motion of
magnet and coil when the surface of the Earth shakes induces an emf output.

Ground Fault Circuit Interrupter (GFCI)
Fuses  and  circuit  breakers  (Sections  18–6  and  20–7)  protect  buildings  from
electricity-induced fire, and apparatus from damage, due to undesired high cur-
rents. But they do not turn off the current until it is very much greater than that
which  can  cause  permanent  damage  to  humans  or  death
If  fast
enough, they may protect humans in some cases, such as very high currents due to
short circuits.A ground fault circuit interrupter (GFCI) is meant above all to protect
humans.

(L 100 mA).

Simple electronic circuit

P H Y S I C S   A P P L I E D

Seismograph

FIGURE 21–33 A ground fault circuit
interrupter (GFCI).

Power lines

120 V

Hot

Neutral

Sensing
coil

Solenoid
circuit breaker

I

S

I
Iron ring

I

I

Electric circuit with
one or more devices
(possible sources
of trouble)

Electromagnetic  induction  is  the  physical  basis  of  a  GFCI. As  shown  in
Fig. 21–33, the two conductors of a power line connected to an electric circuit or device
(red) pass through a small iron ring. Around the ring are many loops of thin wire
that serve as a sensing coil. Under normal conditions (no ground fault), the current
moving in the hot power wire is exactly balanced by the returning current in the
neutral wire. If something goes wrong and the hot wire touches the ungrounded
metal case of the device or appliance, some of the entering current can pass through
a person who touches the case and then to ground (a ground fault). Then the return
current in the neutral wire will be less than the entering current in the hot wire, so
there is a net current passing through the GFCI’s iron ring. Because the current
is ac, it is changing and that current difference produces a changing magnetic field
in the iron, thus inducing an emf in the sensing coil wrapped around the iron. For
example, if a device draws 8.0 A, and there is a ground fault through a person of
100 mA (=  0.1 A),
then 7.9 A will appear in the neutral wire. The emf induced
in the sensing coil by this 100-mA difference is amplified by a simple transistor
circuit and sent to its own solenoid circuit breaker that opens the circuit at the
switch S, thus protecting your life.

If the case of the faulty device is grounded, the difference in current is even

higher when there is a fault, and the GFCI trips very quickly.

GFCIs can sense current differences as low as 5 mA and react in 1 ms, saving
lives. They can be small to fit as a wall outlet (Fig. 21–34a), or as a plug-in unit
into which you plug a hair dryer or toaster (Fig. 21–34b). It is especially important to
have GFCIs installed in kitchens, in bathrooms, outdoors, and near swimming pools,
where people are most in danger of touching ground. GFCIs always have a “test”
button (to be sure the GFCI itself works) and a “reset” button (after it goes off).

P H Y S I C S   A P P L I E D

GFCI

FIGURE 21–34 (a) A GFCI wall
outlet. GFCIs can be recognized
by their “test” and “reset” buttons.
(b) Add-on GFCI that plugs into outlet.

(a)

(b)

*SECTION 21–9 Applications of Induction: Microphone, Seismograph, GFCI

607

Coil 1

Coil 2

I1

e
2
(induced)

FIGURE 21–35 A changing current
in one coil will induce a current in
the second coil.

P H Y S I C S   A P P L I E D
Pacemaker

*

21–10 Inductance

*

Mutual Inductance
If two coils of wire are near one another, as in Fig. 21–35, a changing current in
e
one will induce an emf in the other. We apply Faraday’s law to coil 2: the emf
2
induced in coil 2 is proportional to the rate of change of magnetic flux passing
I
through it. A changing flux in coil 2 is produced by a changing current
in coil 1.
1
is proportional to the rate of change of the current in coil 1:
So

e
2

e
2

= –M

¢I1
¢t

,

(21;8a)

¢t

where we assume the time interval
is very small, and the constant of propor-
tionality, M, is  called  the  mutual  inductance. (The  minus  sign  is  because  of
Lenz’s  law, the  induced  emf  opposes  the  changing  flux.) Mutual  inductance
which is called the henry (H), after Joseph Henry:
has units of
1 H = 1 (cid:3)(cid:2)s.

V(cid:2)s(cid:2)A = (cid:3)(cid:2)s,

I
1 ;
The mutual inductance M is a “constant” in that it does not depend on
M depends on “geometric” factors such as the size, shape, number of turns, and
relative positions of the two coils, and also on whether iron (or other ferromagnetic
material) is present. For example, the farther apart the two coils are in Fig. 21–35,
the fewer lines of flux can pass through coil 2, so M will be less. If we consider the
inverse  situation—a  changing  current  in  coil  2  inducing  an  emf  in  coil  1—the
proportionality constant, M, turns out to have the same value,

e
1

= –M

¢I2
¢t

.

(21;8b)

A transformer is an example of mutual inductance in which the coupling is
maximized so that nearly all flux lines pass through both coils. Mutual inductance
has other uses as well, including inductive charging of cell phones, electric cars,
and other devices with rechargeable batteries, as we discussed in Section 21–7.
Some  types  of  pacemakers  used  to  maintain  blood  flow  in  heart  patients
(Section 19–6) receive their power from an external coil which is transmitted via
mutual inductance to a second coil in the pacemaker near the heart. This type has
the advantage over battery-powered pacemakers in that surgery is not needed to
replace a battery when it wears out.

*

Self-Inductance
The concept of inductance applies also to an isolated single coil. When a changing
current passes through a coil or solenoid, a changing magnetic flux is produced
inside  the  coil, and  this  in  turn  induces  an  emf. This  induced  emf  opposes  the
change in flux (Lenz’s law); it is much like the back emf generated in a motor.
(For example, if the current through the coil is increasing, the increasing mag-
netic flux induces an emf that opposes the original current and tends to retard
is proportional to the rate of change in current
its increase.) The induced emf
(and is in the direction opposed to the change, hence the minus sign):

e

e = –L

¢I
¢t

.

(21;9)

The  constant  of  proportionality  L is  called  the  self-inductance, or  simply  the
inductance of the coil. It, too, is measured in henrys. The magnitude of L depends
on the size and shape of the coil and on the presence of an iron core.

An ac circuit (Section 18–7) always contains some inductance, but often it is
quite small unless the circuit contains a coil of many loops or turns. A coil that
has  significant  self-inductance  L is  called  an  inductor. It  is  shown  on  circuit
diagrams by the symbol

.

[inductor symbol]

608 CHAPTER 21 Electromagnetic Induction and Faraday’s Law

CONCEPTUAL EXAMPLE 21;12
Direction of emf in inductor. Current
passes through the coil in Fig. 21–36 from left to right as shown. (a) If the current is
increasing with time, in which direction is the induced emf? (b) If the current
is decreasing in time, what then is the direction of the induced emf?
RESPONSE (a) From Lenz’s law we know that the induced emf must oppose
the change in magnetic flux. If the current is increasing, so is the magnetic flux.
The induced emf acts to oppose the increasing flux, which means it acts like a
source  of  emf  that  opposes  the  outside  source  of  emf  driving  the  current. So
the induced emf in the coil acts to oppose I in Fig. 21–36a. In other words, the
inductor might be thought of as a battery with a positive terminal at point A
(tending to block the current entering at A), and negative at point B.
(b)  If  the  current  is  decreasing, then  by  Lenz’s  law  the  induced  emf  acts  to
bolster the flux—like a source of emf reinforcing the external emf. The induced
emf acts to increase I in Fig. 21–36b, so in this situation you can think of the
induced emf as a battery with its negative terminal at point A to attract more
current (conventional,

) to move to the right.

±

I
increasing

A
+

I
decreasing

A
−

B
−

B
+

(a)

(b)

FIGURE 21–36 Example 21–12.

N = 100,  l = 5.0 cm,  A = 0.30 cm2,

EXAMPLE 21;13
Solenoid inductance. (a) Determine a formula for the
self-inductance L of a long tightly wrapped solenoid coil of length  and cross-
sectional area A, that contains N turns (or loops) of wire. (b) Calculate the value
of L if
APPROACH The induced emf in a coil can be determined either from Faraday’s
If we equate
law
these two expressions, we can solve for the inductance L since we know how to
calculate the flux
SOLUTION (a) We  equate  Faraday’s  law  (Eq. 21–2b)  and  Eq. 21–9  for  the
inductance:

for a solenoid using Eq. 20–8 (

and the solenoid is air filled.

Ae = –L ¢I(cid:2)¢tB.

or the self-inductance

Ae = –N ¢£
B

B = m
0

IN(cid:2)l

(cid:2)¢tB

£
B

).

l

e = –N

¢£
B
¢t

= –L

¢I
¢t

,

and solve for L:

L = N

¢£
B
¢I

.

£
We know
B
B = m
a solenoid,

= BA

0 NI(cid:2)l,

(Eq. 21–1), and Eq. 20–8 gives us the magnetic field B for

so the magnetic flux inside the solenoid is

£
B

=

m
0

NIA
l

.

Any change in current,

¢I,

causes a change in flux

¢£
B

=

m
0

N ¢I A
l

.

We put this into our equation above for L:

L = N

¢£
B
¢I

=

m
0

N2A
l

.

(b) Using

m
0

= 4p * 10–7 T(cid:2)m(cid:2)A,

and putting in values given,

L =

A4p * 10–7 T(cid:2)m(cid:2)AB(100)2A3.0 * 10–5 m2B
A5.0 * 10–2 mB

= 7.5 mH.

*SECTION 21–10 Inductance 609

*

21–11 Energy Stored in a Magnetic Field
In Section 17–9 we saw that the energy stored in a capacitor is equal to
1
2 CV2.
By  using  a similar  argument, it  can  be  shown  that  the  energy  U stored  in  an
inductance L, carrying a current I, is
2 LI2.

U = energy = 1

Just as the energy stored in a capacitor can be considered to reside in the electric
field  between  its  plates, so  the  energy  in  an  inductor  can  be  considered  to  be
stored in its magnetic field.

To  write  the  energy  in  terms  of  the  magnetic  field, we  quote  the  result  of
The magnetic
0 NI(cid:2)l.
B = m

N2A(cid:2)l.
Example 21–13 that the inductance of a solenoid is
field B in a solenoid is related to the current I (see Eq. 20–8) by
Thus,

L = m
0

I = Bl(cid:2)m
0

and

N,

U = energy = 1

2 LI2 = 1
2

m
0

¢

N2A
l

≤ ¢ Bl
N
m
0

2

≤

= 1
2

B2
m
0

Al.

We can think of this energy as residing in the volume enclosed by the windings,
Then the energy per unit volume, or energy density, is
which is

Al.

u = energy density = 1
2

B2
m
0

.

(21;10)

This formula, which was derived for the special case of a solenoid, can be shown to
be valid for any region of space where a magnetic field exists. If a ferromagnetic
m
is replaced by  This equation is analogous to that for an
material is present,
0
Section 17–9.
E2,
electric field,

m.

(cid:5)

1
2

0

C

*

21–12 LR Circuit

V
0

Any inductor will have some resistance. We represent an inductor by drawing the
inductance L and its resistance R separately, as in Fig. 21–37. The resistance R
could also include any other resistance in the circuit. Now we ask, what happens
when a battery of voltage
is connected in series to such an LR circuit? At the
instant the switch connecting the battery is closed, the current starts to flow. It is
opposed  by  the  induced  emf  in  the  inductor  because  of  the  changing  current.
However, as  soon  as  current  starts  to  flow, there  is  a voltage  drop  across  the
resistance
Hence, the voltage drop across the inductance is reduced
and the current increases less rapidly. The current thus rises gradually, as shown
in Fig. 21–38a, and approaches the steady value
when there is no
more emf in the inductor (I is no longer changing) so all the voltage drop is across
the resistance. The shape of the curve for I as a function of time is

(V = IR).

Imax = V
0

(cid:2)R

A

B

R

L

I

Switch

V0
FIGURE 21–37 LR circuit.

FIGURE 21–38 (a) Growth of
current in an LR circuit when
connected to a battery. (b) Decay of
current when the LR circuit is shorted
out (battery is out of the circuit).

I

Imax

0.63Imax

I

Imax

0.37Imax

Imax = V0 / R

I = a

[LR circuit with emf]

V
0
R
e = 2.718

b A1 - e–t(cid:2)tB,
p

(see Section 19–6) and

where e is the number
L
R

t =

Time

τ

= L
R

(a)

is the time constant of the circuit. When
time required for the current to reach

t = t,
0.63Imax .
Next, if  the  battery  is  suddenly  switched  out  of  the  circuit  (dashed  line  in
Fig. 21–37), it takes time for the current to drop to zero, as shown in Fig. 21–38b.
This is an exponential decay curve given by
I = Imax e–t(cid:2)t.

[LR circuit without emf]

A1 - e–1B = 0.63,

is the

t
so

then

t
The time constant
original value), and again equals

L(cid:2)R.

is the time for the current to decrease to

0.37Imax

(37% of the

Time

τ

= L
R

(b)

These graphs show that there is always some “lag time” or “reaction time”
when  an  electromagnet, for  example, is  turned  on  or  off. We  also  see  that  an
LR circuit  has  properties  similar  to  an  RC circuit  (Section  19–6). Unlike  the
capacitor case, however, the time constant here is inversely proportional to R.

610 CHAPTER 21 Electromagnetic Induction and Faraday’s Law

*

21–13 AC Circuits and Reactance

We have previously discussed circuits that contain combinations of resistor, capac-
itor, and inductor, but only when they are connected to a dc source of emf or to
zero voltage. Now we discuss these circuit elements when they are connected to a
source of alternating voltage that produces an alternating current (ac).

First we examine, one at a time, how a resistor, a capacitor, and an inductor
behave when connected to a source of alternating voltage, represented by the symbol

[alternating voltage]

which produces a sinusoidal voltage of frequency f. We assume in each case that
the emf gives rise to a current
0 cos 2pft,
I
0
Irms = I
0

is  the  peak  current. Remember  (Section  18–7)  that

is  time  and
(cid:2)12

t
where
Vrms = V
0

(Eq. 18–8).

I = I

(cid:2)12

and

*

Resistor
When an ac source is connected to a resistor as in Fig. 21–39a, the current increases
and decreases with the alternating voltage according to Ohm’s law,

V = IR = I
0

R cos 2pft = V

0 cos 2pft

R

V
0

= I
0

is the peak voltage. Figure 21–39b shows the voltage (red curve)
where
and the current (blue curve) as a function of time. Because the current is zero
when the voltage is zero and the current reaches a peak when the voltage does,
we say that the current and voltage are in phase. Energy is transformed into heat
(Section 18–7), at an average rate

g = q = Irms

2 R = Vrms

2 (cid:2)R.

*

Inductor
In Fig. 21–40a an inductor of inductance L (symbol
) is connected to the
ac source. We ignore any resistance it might have (it is usually small). The voltage
applied to the inductor will be equal to the “back” emf generated in the inductor
by the changing current as given by Eq. 21–9. This is because the sum of the elec-
tric potential changes around any closed circuit must add up to zero, by Kirchhoff’s
rule. Thus

or

= 0

V - L

¢I
¢t

=

¢I
¢t

V
L

L ¢I(cid:2)¢t

V = –V
0 .

where V is the sinusoidally varying voltage of the source and
is the voltage
induced  in  the  inductor. According  to  the  last  equation, I is  increasing  most
And I will be decreasing most
rapidly when V has its maximum value,
rapidly when
These two instants correspond to points d and b on the
graph of voltage versus time in Fig. 21–40b. By going point by point in this manner,
the curve of V versus  as compared to that for I versus  can be constructed, and
they are shown by the blue and red lines, respectively, in Fig. 21–40b. Notice that
the current reaches its peaks (and troughs)
cycle after the voltage does. We say
that the

V = V
0 .

1
4

t

t

current lags the voltage by 90° for an inductor.

R

(a)

V

I

V0
I0

0

t

I
V

I = I0 cos 2
π ft
V = V0 cos 2π ft
(b)

FIGURE 21–39 (a) Resistor
connected to an ac source.
(b) Current (blue curve) is in phase
with the voltage (red) across a
resistor.

FIGURE 21–40 (a) Inductor
connected to an ac source.
(b) Current (blue curve) lags voltage
(red curve) by a quarter cycle, or 90°.
L

(a)

V

b c

d

e

V0
I0

I

a

0

t

I

Because the current and voltage in an inductor are out of phase by 90°, the product
IV (=  power)
is as often positive as it is negative (Fig. 21–40b). So no energy is trans-
formed in an inductor on average; and no energy is dissipated as thermal energy.

(b)

V

I = I0 cos 2πft
V = –V0 sin 2πft

*SECTION 21–13 AC Circuits and Reactance 611

Just as a resistor impedes the flow of charge, so too an inductor impedes the
flow  of  charge  in  an  alternating  current  due  to  the  back  emf  produced. For  a
resistor R, the current and voltage are related by
We can write a similar
relation for an inductor:

V = IR.

V = IXL ,

c rms or peak values,
not at any instant

d

(21;11a)

X
L

is called the inductive reactance.

has units of ohms. The quantities
where
V and I in Eq. 21–11a can refer either to rms for both, or to peak values for both
(see Section 18–7). Although this equation can relate the peak values, the peak
current and voltage are not reached at the same time; so Eq. 21–11a is not valid at
Careful  calculation
a particular  instant, as  is  the  case  for  a resistor
(using calculus), as well as experiment, shows that

(V = IR).

X
L

X
L
v = 2pf

where

= vL = 2pfL,

and f is the frequency of the ac.

(21;11b)

For example, the inductive reactance of a 0.300-H inductor at 120 V and 60.0 Hz

is

X
L

= 2pfL = (6.28)A60.0 s–1B(0.300 H) = 113 (cid:3).

*

Capacitor
When a capacitor is connected to a battery, the capacitor plates quickly acquire
equal and opposite charges; but no steady current flows in the circuit. A capacitor
prevents the flow of a dc current. But if a capacitor is connected to an alternating
source of voltage, as in Fig. 21–41a, an alternating current will flow continuously.
This  can  happen  because  when  the  ac  voltage  is  first  turned  on, charge  begins
to flow and one plate acquires a negative charge and the other a positive charge.
But when the voltage reverses itself, the charges flow in the opposite direction.
Thus, for  an  alternating  applied  voltage, an  ac  current  is  present  in  the  circuit
continuously.

FIGURE 21–41 (a) Capacitor
connected to an ac source.
(b) Current leads voltage by
a quarter cycle, or 90°.

V0
I0

0

V

I

a b

c

d

V

t

I

I = I0 cos 2πft
V = V0 sin 2πft
(b)

C

(a)

The applied voltage must equal the voltage across the capacitor:

V = Q(cid:2)C,
where C is the capacitance and Q the charge on the plates. Thus the charge Q on
the plates is in phase with the voltage. But what about the current I? At point a in
Fig. 21–41b, when the voltage is zero and starts increasing, the charge on the plates
is  zero. Thus  charge  flows  readily  toward  the  plates  and  the  current  I is  large.
(point b in Fig. 21–41b), the charge
As the voltage approaches its maximum of
that has accumulated on the plates tends to prevent more charge from flowing, so
the current I drops to zero at point b. Thus the current follows the blue curve in
Fig. 21–41b. Like an inductor, the voltage and current are out of phase by 90°.
But for a capacitor, the current reaches its peaks
cycle before the voltage does,
so we say that the

V
0

1
4

current leads the voltage by 90° for a capacitor.

C A U T I O N
Only resistance dissipates
energy

Because the current and voltage are out of phase, the average power dissipated is
zero, just as for an inductor. Thus only a resistance will dissipate energy as thermal
energy in an ac circuit.

612 CHAPTER 21 Electromagnetic Induction and Faraday’s Law

A relationship between the applied voltage and the current in a capacitor can

be written just as for an inductance:

V = IXC ,

c rms or peak
values

d

(21;12a)

X
C

where
both be rms or both maximum (
and the frequency f:

is called the capacitive reactance and has units of ohms. V and I can
depends on both the capacitance C

I
and  );
0

V
0

X
C

,

(21;12b)

v = 2pf.

where
and
because a capacitor does not pass dc current.

f = 0

X
C

becomes infinite, as it should

X
C

=

=

1
vC

1
2pfC
For dc conditions,

and

Vrms = 120 V?

C = 1.00 mF
f = 6.00 * 105 Hz.

Capacitor reactance. What is the rms current in the circuit
f = 60.0 Hz,

EXAMPLE 21;14
of Fig. 21–41a if
and then for (b)
APPROACH We find the reactance using Eq. 21–12b, and solve for current in
the equivalent form of Ohm’s law, Eq. 21–12a.
X
SOLUTION (a)
C
The rms current is (Eq. 21–12a):

= 1(cid:2)2pfC = 1(cid:2)(2p)A60.0 s–1BA1.00 * 10–6 FB = 2.65 k(cid:3).

Calculate for (a)

Irms =

Vrms
X
C

=

120 V
2.65 * 103 (cid:3)

= 45.2 mA.

f = 6.00 * 105 Hz,  X
C

vastly larger!
(b) For
NOTE The dependence on f is dramatic. For high frequencies, the capacitive
reactance is very small.

Irms = 452 A,

0.265 (cid:3)

will be

and

Two common applications of capacitors are illustrated in Figs. 21–42a and b. In
Fig. 21–42a, circuit A is said to be capacitively coupled to circuit B. The purpose of
the capacitor is to prevent a dc voltage from passing from A to B but allowing an
ac signal to pass relatively unimpeded (if C is sufficiently large). In Fig. 21–42b, the

P H Y S I C S   A P P L I E D

Capacitors as filters

Circuit
A

Signal

C

Circuit
B

(a)

High-pass filter

Signal

A

B

C

Amplifier
output

C

L

FIGURE 21–42 (a) and (b): Two
common uses for a capacitor as a filter.
(c) Simple loudspeaker cross-over.

(b)

Low-pass filter

(c)

capacitor also passes ac and not dc. In this case, a dc voltage can be maintained
between circuits A and B, but an ac signal leaving A passes to ground instead of
into B. Thus the capacitor in Fig. 21–42b acts like a filter when a constant dc voltage
is  required; any  sharp  variation  in  voltage  passes  to  ground  instead  of  into
circuit B.

EXERCISE F The capacitor C in Fig. 21–42a is often called a “high-pass” filter, and the
one in Fig. 21–42b a “low-pass” filter. Explain why.

Loudspeakers having separate “woofer” (low-frequency speaker) and “tweeter”
(high-frequency speaker) may use a simple “cross-over” that consists of a capaci-
tor in the tweeter circuit to impede low-frequency signals, and an inductor in the
woofer circuit to impede high-frequency signals
Hence mainly low-
frequency sounds reach and are emitted by the woofer. See Fig. 21–42c.

= 2pfLB.

AX
L

P H Y S I C S   A P P L I E D

Loudspeaker cross-over

*SECTION 21–13 AC Circuits and Reactance 613

*

21–14 LRC Series AC Circuit

R

L

C

V
FIGURE 21–43 An LRC circuit.

C A U T I O N
Peak voltages do not add to yield
source voltage

y
VL0 = I0 XL

*

I0

VR0 = I0 R

VC0 = I0 XC

y

I0

VR 0 = I0 R

2π
f t

(a)

VL0 = I0 XL

VC 0 = I0 XC

y

I0

VR0

2π
f t

VR

I
VC

VC0

(b)

VL0

VL

(c)

x

x

x

FIGURE 21–44 Phasor diagram for a
t
(b) time
series LRC circuit at (a)
later. (c) Projections on the x axis
at time  .t
which give I,
R ,

t = 0,

V
L

C ,

V

V

FIGURE 21–45 Phasor diagram for a
series LRC circuit showing the sum
vector, V
0 .

y

V0

VR0

2 ftπ

x

f
I0

V

VL0 − VC 0

= 0,

Let us examine a circuit containing all three elements in series: a resistor R, an
inductor L, and a capacitor C, Fig. 21–43. If a given circuit contains only two of
R = 0,
these  elements, we  can  still  use  the  results  of  this  Section  by  setting
X
represent  the  voltage
L
V
across each element at a given instant in time; and
L0 ,
represent
the maximum (peak)  values  of  these  voltages. The  voltage  across  each  of  the
elements will follow the phase relations we discussed in the previous Section. At
any instant the voltage V supplied by the source will be, by Kirchhoff’s loop rule,

as  needed. We  let

V
C
R0 ,

and
V

= 0,

and

X
C

or

R ,

L ,

V

V

V

C0

V = V
R

+ V
L

+ V

C .

(21;13a)

Because the various voltages are not in phase, they do not reach their peak values at
C0 .
the same time, so the peak voltage of the source  will not equal

+ V

+ V

V
0

V

R0

L0

Phasor Diagrams
The current in an LRC circuit at any instant is the same at all points in the circuit
(charge does not pile up in the wires). Thus the currents in each element are in
phase with each other, even though the voltages are not. We choose our origin
in time

so that the current I at any time

(t = 0)

is

t

I = I

0 cos 2pft.

AC circuits are complicated to analyze. The easiest approach is to use a sort
of vector device known as a phasor diagram. Arrows (treated like vectors) are
drawn in an xy coordinate system to represent each voltage. The length of each
arrow represents the magnitude of the peak voltage across each element:

= I
0

X

C .

(21;13b)

V

R0

= I
0

R,    V

L0

= I
0

X

L ,    and    V
(t = 0)

C0

t

L0

C0

R0

R0

V

V

lags the current by 90°, so

leads the current by 90°, so it leads

is in phase with the current and is initially
I
0 .

V
drawn along the positive
V
x axis, as is the current
by 90° and
V
is initially drawn along the positive y axis.
is
drawn  initially  along  the  negative  y axis. See  Fig. 21–44a. If  we  let  the  vector
diagram  rotate  counterclockwise  at  frequency  f, we  get  the  diagram  shown  in
Fig. 21–44b; after a time,
Then
the  projections  of  each  arrow  on  the  x axis  represent  the  voltages  across  each
0 cos 2pft.
element at the instant  , as can be seen in Fig. 21–44c. For example
The sum of the projections of the three voltage vectors represents the instanta-
neous  voltage  across  the  whole  circuit, V. Therefore, the  vector  sum  of  these
as shown
vectors will be the vector that represents the peak source voltage,
in Fig. 21–45 where it is seen that  makes an angle  with
As time
and
rotates with the other vectors, so the instantaneous voltage V (projec-
passes,
on the x axis) is (see Fig. 21–45)
tion of

, each arrow has rotated through an angle

V
0 ,
V
R0 .

2pft.

I = I

V
0

I
0

f

C0

t

V
0
V
0

V = V

0 cos(2pft + f).

The voltage V across the whole circuit must equal the source voltage (Fig. 21–43).
Thus the voltage from the source is out of phase with the current by an angle

f.

From  this  analysis  we  can  now  determine  the  total  impedance Z of  the

circuit, which is defined in analogy to resistance and reactance as

Vrms = Irms Z,    or    V

0

= I
0

Z.

(21;14)

From Fig. 21–45 we see, using the Pythagorean theorem (

V
0

is the hypotenuse of a

614 CHAPTER 21 Electromagnetic Induction and Faraday’s Law

right triangle), that (use Eq. 21–13b)

V
0

= 3V

2 + AV
R0

L0

- V

C0

B2

= I

03R2 + AX

L

- X
C

B2 .

Thus, from Eq. 21–14, the total impedance Z is

Z = 3R2 + AX
L

B2 .
- X
(21;15)
C
Also from Fig. 21–45, we can find the phase angle  between voltage and current:
I
0

- X
C

V

f

B

X
L

L0

=

- X
C
R

(21;16a)

- V
V

R0

C0

=

AX
L
I
0

R

tan f =

and

cos f =

V
R0
V
0

=

R
Z

I
0
I
0

=

R
Z

.

(21;16b)

X
Figure 21–45 was drawn for the case
L
voltage by  When the reverse is true,
than zero, and the current leads the source voltage.

7 X
X
L

C ,
6 X

f.

and the current lags the source
in Eqs. 21–16 is less
C ,

then

f

We saw earlier that power is dissipated only by a resistance; none is dissipated
2 R.

by inductance or capacitance. Therefore, the average power is given by
But from Eq. 21–16b,

R = Z cos f.

g = Irms

Therefore

g = Irms

2 Z cos f = Irms Vrms cos f.

(21;17)

The factor

cos f

is referred to as the power factor of the circuit.

LRC circuit. Suppose

R = 25.0 (cid:3), L = 30.0 mH,

EXAMPLE 21;15
and
C = 12.0 mF
in Fig. 21–43, and they are connected in series to a 90.0-V ac (rms)
500-Hz source. Calculate (a) the current in the circuit, and (b) the voltmeter
readings (rms) across each element.
APPROACH To  obtain  the  current, we  determine  the  impedance  (Eq. 21–15
plus Eqs. 21–11b and 21–12b), and then use
(Eq. 21–14). Voltage
drops  across  each  element  are  found  using  Ohm’s  law  or  equivalent  for  each
element:
SOLUTION (a)  First, we  find  the  reactance  of  the  inductor  and  capacitor  at
f = 500 Hz = 500 s–1:

Irms = Vrms(cid:2)Z

VC = IXC .

= IR, V
L

= IXL ,

and

V
R

= 2pfL = 94.2 (cid:3),    X

C

X
L

=

1
2pfC

= 26.5 (cid:3).

Then the total impedance is

Z = 3R2 + AX
L

- X
C

B2 = 3(25.0 (cid:3))2 + (94.2 (cid:3) - 26.5 (cid:3))2 = 72.2 (cid:3).

From the impedance version of Ohm’s law, Eq. 21–14,

Irms =

Vrms
Z

= 90.0 V
72.2 (cid:3)

= 1.25 A.

(b) The rms voltage across each element is

AV
R
AV
L
AV
C

Brms = Irms R = (1.25 A)(25.0 (cid:3)) = 31.2 V
Brms = Irms X
= (1.25 A)(94.2 (cid:3)) = 118 V
L
= (1.25 A)(26.5 (cid:3)) = 33.1 V.
Brms = Irms X
C

NOTE These voltages do not add up to the source voltage, 90.0 V (rms). Indeed,
the rms voltage across the inductance exceeds the source voltage. This can happen
because the different voltages are out of phase with each other: so, at any instant
the capacitor’s voltage might be negative which compensates for a large positive
inductor voltage. The rms voltages, however, are always positive by definition.
Although the rms voltages need not add up to the source voltage, the instantaneous
voltages at any time must add up to the source voltage at that instant.

C A U T I O N
Individual peak or rms voltages
do NOT add up to source voltage
(due to phase differences)

*SECTION 21–14 LRC Series AC Circuit

615

*

21–15 Resonance in AC Circuits

The rms current in an LRC series circuit is given by (see Eqs. 21–14, 21–15, 21–11b,
and 21–12b):

Irms

R2 + a 2pfL -

C

Irms =

Vrms
Z

=

Vrms

.

2

b

1
2pfC

(21;18)

For
small R

Because the reactance of inductors and capacitors depends on the frequency f of
the source, the current in an LRC circuit depends on frequency. From Eq. 21–18
we see that the current will be maximum at a frequency that satisfies

2pfL -

1
2pfC

= 0.

For
large R

0
0.90 f0
1.10 f0
f0
FIGURE 21–46 Current in an LRC
circuit as a function of frequency,
showing resonance peak at
f = f
0

= 1(cid:2)(2p1LC).

We solve this for f, and call the solution
= 1

.

f
0

1
LC

2p A

f
0 :

[resonance]

(21;19)

f
0

f = f

L ,

X
L

X
C

Irms

= X

the circuit is in resonance, and

0 ,
When
circuit. At this frequency,
of
smaller R compared to

is the resonant frequency of the
so the impedance is purely resistive. A graph
versus f is shown in Fig. 21–46 for particular values of R, L, and C. For
the resonance peak will be higher and sharper.
When R is very small, we speak of an LC circuit. The energy in an LC circuit
oscillates, at frequency
between the inductor and the capacitor, with some being
dissipated in R (some resistance is unavoidable). This is called an LC oscillation
or an electromagnetic oscillation. Not only does the charge oscillate back and forth,
but so does the energy, which oscillates between being stored in the electric field
of the capacitor and in the magnetic field of the inductor.

and

f
0 ,

C ,

X

Electric resonance is used in many circuits. Radio and TV sets, for example,
use resonant circuits for tuning in a station. Many frequencies reach the circuit
from the antenna, but a significant current flows only for frequencies at or near
the resonant frequency chosen (the station you want). Either L or C is variable
so that different stations can be tuned in (more on this in Chapter 22).

Summary

The magnetic flux passing through a loop is equal to the prod-
uct of the area of the loop times the perpendicular component
of the magnetic field:

B

£

= B⊥ A = BA cos u.

(21;1)
If the magnetic flux through a coil of wire changes in time,
an  emf  is  induced  in  the  coil. The  magnitude  of  the  induced
emf equals the time rate of change of the magnetic flux through
the loop times the number N of loops in the coil:

e = –N

¢£
B
¢t

.

(21;2b)

This is Faraday’s law of induction.

The  induced  emf  can  produce  a current  whose  magnetic

field opposes the original change in flux (Lenz’s law).

Faraday’s law also tells us that a changing magnetic field
l
produces an electric field; and that a straight wire of length
perpendicular  to  a magnetic  field  of
moving  with  speed
strength B has an emf induced between its ends equal to

v

e = Blv.

(21;3)
An  electric  generator changes  mechanical  energy  into
electric energy. Its operation is based on Faraday’s law: a coil
of wire is made to rotate uniformly by mechanical means in a
magnetic field, and the changing flux through the coil induces
a sinusoidal current, which is the output of the generator.

A motor, which operates in the reverse of a generator, acts
like a generator in that a back emf is induced in its rotating coil.
Because this back emf opposes the input voltage, it can act to
limit  the  current  in  a motor  coil. Similarly, a  generator  acts
somewhat  like  a motor  in  that  a counter  torque acts  on  its
rotating coil.

A transformer, which is a device to change the magnitude
of an ac voltage, consists of a primary coil and a secondary coil.
The  changing  flux  due  to  an  ac  voltage  in  the  primary  coil
induces an ac voltage in the secondary coil. In a 100% efficient
AVS(cid:2)VPB
transformer, the  ratio  of  output  to  input  voltages
equals the ratio of the number of turns
in the secondary to
the number

in the primary:

NP

NS

VS
VP

=

NS
NP

.

(21;6)

The ratio of secondary to primary current is in the inverse ratio
of turns:

IS
IP

NP
NS

=

.

(21;7)

(cid:2)

[*Read write heads for computer hard drives and tape, as
well as microphones, ground fault circuit interrupters, and seismo-
graphs, are all applications of electromagnetic induction.]

616 CHAPTER 21 Electromagnetic Induction and Faraday’s Law

[*A  changing  current  in  a coil  of  wire  will  produce  a
changing  magnetic  field  that  induces  an  emf  in  a second  coil
placed nearby. The mutual inductance, M, is defined by
¢I1
¢t

(21;8)]

= –M

e
2

.

[*Within a single coil, the changing B due to a changing
so  a coil  has  a

e,

current  induces  an  opposing  emf,
self-inductance L defined by
¢I
¢t

e = –L

.

(21;9)]

U = 1

[*The energy stored in an inductance L carrying current I
is given by
This energy can be thought of as being
stored in the magnetic field of the inductor. The energy density u
in any magnetic field B is given by

2 LI2.

u = 1
2

B2
m
0

.

(21;10)]

[*When an inductance L and resistor R are connected in

series to a source of emf,

the current rises as

V
0 ,

I =

A1 - e–t(cid:2)tB,

V
0
R

t = L(cid:2)R

is the time constant. If the battery is suddenly
where
switched out of the LR circuit, the current drops exponentially,
I = Imax e–t(cid:2)t.

]

current (either the rms or peak values). Across an inductor,

V = IXL ,

and across a capacitor,

V = IXC .

(21;11a)

(21;12a)

The reactance of an inductor increases with frequency f,

(21;11b)
whereas the reactance of a capacitor decreases with frequency f,

= 2pfL,

X
L

X
C

=

1
2pfC

.

(21;12b)

The current through a resistor is always in phase with the voltage
across it, but in an inductor the current lags the voltage by 90°,
and in a capacitor the current leads the voltage by 90°.]

[*In an LRC series circuit, the total impedance Z is defined

V = IR
Z    or    Vrms = Irms Z;

for resistance, namely,

(21;14)

by the equivalent of

V
0
Z is given by

= I
0

Z = 3R2 + AX
L

- X
C

B2 .

(21;15)]

[*An LRC series circuit resonates at a frequency given by

f
0

= 1

2p A

1
LC

.

(21;19)

[*Inductive  and  capacitive  reactance, X, defined  as  for
resistors, is the proportionality constant between voltage and

The  rms  current  in  the  circuit  is  largest  when  the  applied
voltage has a frequency equal to

]f
0 .

Questions

1. What  would  be  the  advantage, in  Faraday’s  experiments

(Fig. 21–1), of using coils with many turns?

2. What is the difference between magnetic flux and magnetic

field?

3. Suppose you are holding a circular ring of wire in front of you
and (a) suddenly thrust a magnet, south pole first, away from
you toward the center of the circle. Is a current induced in
the wire? (b) Is a current induced when the magnet is held
steady within the ring? (c) Is a current induced when you
withdraw  the  magnet? For  each  yes  answer, specify  the
direction. Explain your answers.

4. (a) A wire loop is pulled away from a current-carrying wire
(Fig. 21–47). What is the direction of the induced current
in the loop: clockwise or counterclockwise?
(b) What if the wire loop stays fixed as the
current I decreases? Explain
your answers.

I

FIGURE 21–47
Question 4.

5. (a) If the north pole of a thin flat magnet moves on a table
toward a loop also on the table (Fig. 21–48), in what direc-
tion is the induced current in the loop? Assume the magnet
is the same thickness as the wire. (b) What if the magnet is
four times thicker than the wire loop? Explain
your answers.

FIGURE 21–48
Question 5.

S

N

6. Suppose you are looking along a line through the centers of
two circular (but separate) wire loops, one behind the other.
A battery is suddenly connected to the front loop, establish-
ing a clockwise current. (a) Will a current be induced in the
second loop? (b) If so, when does this current start? (c) When
does it stop? (d) In what direction is this current? (e) Is there
a force between the two loops? (f ) If so, in what direction?

7. The battery mentioned in Question 6 is disconnected. Will
a current be induced in the second loop? If so, when does
it start and stop? In what direction is this current?

8. In Fig. 21–49, determine the direction of the induced cur-
rent in resistor
(a) when coil B is moved toward coil A,
(b) when coil B is moved away from A, (c) when the resis-
RB
tance
is  increased  but  the  coils  remain  fixed. Explain
your answers.

RA

Coil B

Coil A

FIGURE 21–49
Question 8.

RB

RA

9. In situations where a small signal must travel over a distance,
a shielded  cable is  used  in  which  the  signal  wire  is  sur-
rounded by an insulator and then enclosed by a cylindrical
conductor  (shield)  carrying  the  return  current. Why  is  a
“shield” necessary?

10. What is the advantage of placing the two insulated electric
wires carrying ac close together or even twisted about each
other?

11. Explain  why, exactly, the  lights  may  dim  briefly  when  a
refrigerator  motor  starts  up. When  an  electric  heater  is
turned on, the lights may stay dimmed as long as the heater
is on. Explain the difference.

12. Use Figs. 21–14 and 21–17 plus the right-hand rules to show
why the counter torque in a generator opposes the motion.
13. Will an eddy current brake (Fig. 21–20) work on a copper
or aluminum wheel, or must the wheel be ferromagnetic?
Explain.

Questions

617

14. A bar magnet falling inside a vertical metal tube reaches a
terminal velocity even if the tube is evacuated so that there
is no air resistance. Explain.

15. It has been proposed that eddy currents be used to help sort
solid waste for recycling. The waste is first ground into tiny
pieces  and  iron  removed  with  a magnet. The  waste  then
is allowed to slide down an incline over permanent magnets.
How  will  this  aid  in  the  separation  of  nonferrous  metals
(Al, Cu, Pb, brass) from nonmetallic materials?

16. The pivoted metal bar with slots in Fig. 21–50 falls much

more quickly through
a magnetic field than
does  a solid  bar.
Explain.

FIGURE 21–50
Question 16.

Pivot

17. If an aluminum sheet is held between the poles of a large
bar magnet, it requires some force to pull it out of the mag-
netic field even though the sheet is not ferromagnetic and
does not touch the pole faces. Explain.

18. A  bar  magnet  is  held  above  the  floor  and  dropped

(Fig. 21–51). In case (a), the
magnet falls through a wire
loop. In  case  (b), there
is  nothing  between  the
magnet and the floor. How
will the speeds of the mag-
nets compare? Explain.

FIGURE 21–51
Question 18 and
MisConceptual
Question 5.

S

N

(a)

Wire
loop

S

N

(b)

MisConceptual Questions

1. A coil rests in the plane of the page while a magnetic field
is directed into the page. A clockwise current is induced
(a) when the magnetic field gets stronger.
(b) when the size of the coil decreases.
(c) when the coil is moved sideways across the page.
(d) when the magnetic field is tilted so it is no longer

perpendicular to the page.

2. A  wire  loop  moves  at  constant  velocity  without  rotation
through a constant magnetic field. The induced current in
the loop will be
(a) clockwise.
(b) counterclockwise.
(d) We need to know the orientation of the loop relative to

(c) zero.

the magnetic field.

3. A  square  loop  moves  to  the  right  from  an  area  where
B = 0,
B
completely through a region containing a uniform
magnetic field directed into the page (Fig. 21–52), and then
after point L. A current is induced in the loop
out to
(d) as it passes line J or line L.
(a) only as it passes line J.
(b) only as it passes line K.
(e) as it passes all three lines.
(c) only as it passes line L.

B = 0

FIGURE 21–52
MisConceptual
Question 3.

J

K

L

19. A  metal  bar, pivoted  at  one  end, oscillates  freely  in  the
absence of a magnetic field; but in a magnetic field, its oscil-
lations  are  quickly  damped  out. Explain. (This  magnetic
damping is used in a number of practical devices.)

20. An enclosed transformer has four wire leads coming from
it. How could you determine the ratio of turns on the two
coils without taking the transformer apart? How would you
know which wires paired with which?

21. The  use  of  higher-voltage  lines  in  homes—say, 600 V  or
1200 V—would reduce energy waste. Why are they not used?
22. A transformer designed for a 120-V ac input will often “burn
out” if connected to a 120-V dc source. Explain. [Hint: The
resistance of the primary coil is usually very low.]

*23. How would you arrange two flat circular coils so that their
mutual inductance was (a) greatest, (b) least (without sepa-
rating them by a great distance)? Explain.

*24. Does the emf of the battery in Fig. 21–37 affect the time
needed for the LR circuit to reach (a) a given fraction of its
maximum  possible  current, (b)  a given  value  of  current?
Explain.

*25. In  an  LRC circuit, can  the  rms  voltage  across  (a)  an
inductor, (b) a capacitor, be greater than the rms voltage
of the ac source? Explain.

*26. Describe briefly how the frequency of the source emf affects
the impedance of (a) a pure resistance, (b) a pure capacitance,
(c) a pure inductance, (d) an LRC circuit near resonance
(R small), (e) an LRC circuit far from resonance (R small).
*27. Describe how to make the impedance in an LRC circuit a

minimum.

*28. An LRC resonant  circuit  is  often  called  an  oscillator

circuit. What is it that oscillates?

*29. Is  the  ac  current  in  the  inductor  always  the  same  as  the

current in the resistor of an LRC circuit? Explain.

4. Two loops of wire are moving in the vicinity of a very long
straight wire  carrying  a steady  current  (Fig. 21–53). Find
the direction of the induced current in each loop.
For C:

For D:

(a) clockwise.
(b) counterclockwise.
(c) zero.
(d) alternating (ac).

(a) clockwise.
(b) counterclockwise.
(c) zero.
(d) alternating (ac).

I

vB

vB

FIGURE 21–53
MisConceptual Question 4.

C

D

5. If there is induced current in Question 18 (see Fig. 21–51),
wouldn’t that cost energy? Where would that energy come
from in case (a)?
(a) Induced current doesn’t need energy.
(b) Energy conservation is violated.
(c) There is less kinetic energy.
(d) There is more gravitational potential energy.

618 CHAPTER 21 Electromagnetic Induction and Faraday’s Law

6. A nonconducting plastic hoop is held in a magnetic field
that points out of the page (Fig. 21–54). As the strength
of the field increases,
(a) an induced emf will be produced that causes a

clockwise current.

(b) an induced emf will be produced that causes a

counterclockwise current.

(c) an induced emf will be produced but no current.
(d) no induced emf will be produced.

12. A  laptop  computer’s  charger  unit  converts  120 V  from  a
wall  power  outlet  to  the  lower  voltage  required  by  the
laptop. Inside the charger’s plastic case is a diode or rectifier
(discussed in Chapter 29) that changes ac to dc plus a
(a) battery.
(b) motor.
(c) generator.
(d) transformer.
(e) transmission line.

FIGURE 21–54
MisConceptual Question 6.

B
B

13. Which of the following statements about transformers is false?
(a) Transformers work using ac current or dc current.
(b) If the current in the secondary is higher, the voltage is

lower.

(c) If the voltage in the secondary is higher, the current is

7. A  long  straight  wire  carries  a current  I as shown  in
Fig. 21–55. A small loop of wire rests in the plane of the page.
Which of the following will not induce a current in the loop?
(a) Increasing the current in the straight wire.
(b) Moving the loop in a direction parallel to the wire.
(c) Rotating the loop so that it becomes perpendicular to

the plane of the page.

(d) Moving the loop farther from the wire without rotating it.
(e) Moving the loop farther from the wire while rotating it.

I

FIGURE 21–55
MisConceptual Question 7.

8. Two separate but nearby coils are mounted along the same
axis. A power supply controls the flow of current in the first
coil, and thus the magnetic field it produces. The second coil
is connected only to an ammeter. The ammeter will indicate
that a current is flowing in the second coil
(a) whenever a current flows in the first coil.
(b) only when a steady current flows in the first coil.
(c) only when the current in the first coil changes.
(d) only if the second coil is connected to the power supply

by rewiring it to be in series with the first coil.

9. When a generator is used to produce electric current, the
resulting electric energy originates from which source?
(a) The generator’s magnetic field.
(b) Whatever rotates the generator’s axle.
(c) The resistance of the generator’s coil.
(d) Back emf.
(e) Empty space.

10. Which of the following will not increase a generator’s volt-

age output?
(a) Rotating the generator faster.
(b) Increasing the area of the coil.
(c) Rotating the magnetic field so that it is more closely

parallel to the generator’s rotation axis.

(d) Increasing the magnetic field through the coil.
(e) Increasing the number of turns in the coil.

11. Which of the following can a transformer accomplish?

(a) Changing voltage but not current.
(b) Changing current but not voltage.
(c) Changing power.
(d) Changing both current and voltage.

lower.

(d) If no flux is lost, the product of the voltage and the

current is the same in the primary and secondary coils.

14. A  10-V, 1.0-A  dc  current  is  run  through  a step-up  trans-
former that has 10 turns on the input side and 20 turns on
the output side. What is the output?
(a) 10 V, 0.5 A.
(b) 20 V, 0.5 A.
(c) 20 V, 1 A.
(d) 10 V, 1 A.
(e) 0 V, 0 A.

15. The  alternating  electric  current  at  a  wall  outlet  is  most

commonly produced by
(a) a connection to rechargeable batteries.
(b) a rotating coil that is immersed in a magnetic field.
(c) accelerating electrons between oppositely charged

capacitor plates.

(d) using an electric motor.
(e) alternately heating and cooling a wire.

*

16. When you swipe a credit card, the machine sometimes fails

to read the card. What can you do differently?
(a) Swipe the card more slowly so that the reader has more

time to read the magnetic stripe.

(b) Swipe the card more quickly so that the induced emf is

higher.

(c) Swipe the card more quickly so that the induced currents

are reduced.

(d) Swipe the card more slowly so that the magnetic fields

don’t change so fast.

*

17. Which of the following is true about all series ac circuits?
(a) The voltage across any circuit element is a maximum

when the current is a maximum in that circuit element.

(b) The current at any point in the circuit is always the
same as the current at any other point in the circuit.

(c) The current in the circuit is a maximum when the

source ac voltage is a maximum.

(d) Resistors, capacitors, and inductors can all change the

phase of the current.

MisConceptual Questions

619

For assigned homework and other learning materials, go to the MasteringPhysics website.

Problems

21–1 to 21–4 Faraday’s Law of Induction

1. (I) The magnetic flux through a coil of wire containing two
±38 Wb

loops changes at a constant rate from
in 0.34 s. What is the emf induced in the coil?

–58 Wb

to

2. (I) The north pole of the magnet in Fig. 21–57 is being inserted

into the coil. In which direc-
tion is the induced current
flowing through resistor R?
Explain.

S

N

FIGURE 21–57
Problem 2.

R

3. (I) The  rectangular  loop  in  Fig. 21–58  is  being  pushed  to
the right, where the magnetic field points inward. In what
direction is the induced current? Explain your reasoning.

FIGURE 21–58
Problem 3.

4. (I) If the solenoid in Fig. 21–59 is being pulled away from

the  loop  shown,
in
what  direction  is  the
induced  current
in
the loop? Explain.

FIGURE 21–59
Problem 4.

I

I

5. (II) An 18.5-cm-diameter loop of wire is initially oriented
perpendicular to a 1.5-T magnetic field. The loop is rotated
so that its plane is parallel to the field direction in 0.20 s.
What is the average induced emf in the loop?

6. (II) A fixed 10.8-cm-diameter wire coil is perpendicular to
a magnetic  field  0.48 T  pointing  up. In  0.16 s, the  field  is
changed  to  0.25 T  pointing  down. What  is  the  average
induced emf in the coil?

7. (II) A 16-cm-diameter circular loop of wire is placed in a
0.50-T  magnetic  field. (a) When  the  plane  of  the  loop  is
perpendicular to the field lines, what is the magnetic flux
through the loop? (b) The plane of the loop is rotated until
u
it makes a 42° angle with the field lines. What is the angle
in Eq. 21–1 for this situation? (c) What is the magnetic flux
through the loop at this angle?

8. (II) (a) If the resistance of the resistor in Fig. 21–60 is slowly

10. (II)  A  circular  loop  in  the  plane  of  the  paper  lies  in  a
0.65-T  magnetic  field  pointing  into  the  paper. The  loop’s
diameter changes from 20.0 cm to 6.0 cm in 0.50 s. What is
(a) the direction of the induced current, (b) the magnitude
of the average induced emf, and (c) the average induced
current if the coil resistance is

2.5 (cid:3)

?

11. (II) What is the direction of the induced current in the circu-
lar loop due to the current shown in each part of Fig. 21–61?
Explain why.

I constant

I decreasing

(a)

(c)

I decreasing

FIGURE 21–61 Problem 11.

I increasing

(b)

(d)

12. (II) A  600-turn  solenoid, 25 cm  long, has  a diameter  of
2.5 cm. A 14-turn coil is wound tightly around the center of
the solenoid. If the current in the solenoid increases uni-
formly from 0 to 5.0 A in 0.60 s, what will be the induced emf
in the short coil during this time?

13. (II) When a car drives through the Earth’s magnetic field,
an emf is induced in its vertical 55-cm-long radio antenna.
If the Earth’s field
points north with a dip
angle  of  38°, what  is  the  maximum  emf  induced  in  the
antenna and which direction(s) will the car be moving to
produce this maximum value? The car’s speed is
on
a horizontal road.

A5.0 * 10–5 TB

30.0 m(cid:2)s

14. (II) Part of a single rectangular loop of wire with dimensions
shown in Fig. 21–62 is situated inside a region of uniform
magnetic field of 0.550 T. The total resistance of the loop
Calculate the force required to pull the loop from
is
3.10 m(cid:2)s.
the  field  (to  the  right)  at  a constant  velocity  of
Neglect gravity.

0.230 (cid:3).

increased, what is the direction
of  the  current  induced  in  the
small  circular  loop  inside  the
larger  loop? (b) What  would
it  be  if  the  small  loop  were
placed outside the larger one,
to  the  left? Explain  your
answers.

FIGURE 21–60
Problem 8.

9. (II) The moving rod in Fig. 21–11 is 12.0 cm long and is pulled
at  a speed  of
If  the  magnetic  field  is  0.800 T,
calculate (a) the emf developed, and (b) the electric field
felt by electrons in the rod.

18.0 cm(cid:2)s.

620 CHAPTER 21

0.350 m

B
F

I

0.750 m

v,

FIGURE 21–62 Problem 14.
15. (II) In order to make the rod of Fig. 21–11a move to the right
you need to apply an external force on the rod
at speed
to the right. (a) Explain and determine the magnitude of the
required force. (b) What external power is needed to move
the rod? (Do not confuse this external force on the rod with
the upward force on the electrons shown in Fig. 21–11b.)

1.50 m(cid:2)s.

0.25 (cid:3)
16. (II) In Fig. 21–11, the moving rod has a resistance of
U-shaped
and moves on rails 20.0 cm apart. The stationary
conductor has negligible resistance. When a force of 0.350 N
is  applied  to  the  rod, it  moves  to  the  right  at  a constant
speed of

What is the magnetic field?
17. (III) In Fig. 21–11, the rod moves with a speed of
1.6 m(cid:2)s
on
2.5 (cid:3).
The
rails 30.0 cm apart. The rod has a resistance of
U-shaped
magnetic field is 0.35 T, and the resistance of the
at  a given  instant. Calculate  (a)  the
conductor  is
induced  emf, (b)  the  current  in  the
conductor,
and (c) the external force needed to keep the rod’s velocity
constant at that instant.

U-shaped

21.0 (cid:3)

18. (III) A 22.0-cm-diameter coil consists of 30 turns of circular
copper wire 2.6 mm in diameter. A uniform magnetic field,
perpendicular to the plane of the coil, changes at a rate of
8.65 * 10–3 T(cid:2)s.
Determine (a) the current in the loop, and
(b) the rate at which thermal energy is produced.

19. (III) The magnetic field perpendicular to a single 13.2-cm-
diameter circular loop of copper wire decreases uniformly
from  0.670 T  to  zero. If  the  wire  is  2.25 mm  in  diameter,
how much charge moves past a point in the coil during this
operation?

21–5 Generators

20. (II)  The  generator  of  a car  idling  at  1100 rpm  produces
12.7 V. What  will  the  output  be  at  a rotation  speed  of
2500 rpm, assuming nothing else changes?

21. (II) A 550-loop circular armature coil with a diameter of
8.0 cm rotates at
in a uniform magnetic field of
strength 0.55 T. (a) What is the rms voltage output of the
generator? (b)  What  would  you  do  to  the  rotation  fre-
quency in order to double the rms voltage output?

120 rev(cid:2)s

22. (II)  A  generator  rotates  at  85 Hz  in  a magnetic  field  of
0.030 T. It has 950 turns and produces an rms voltage of 150 V
and an rms current of 70.0 A. (a) What is the peak current
produced? (b) What is the area of each turn of the coil?
23. (III) A simple generator has a square armature 6.0 cm on a
side. The  armature  has  85  turns  of  0.59-mm-diameter
copper  wire  and  rotates  in  a 0.65-T  magnetic  field. The
generator is used to power a lightbulb rated at 12.0 V and
25.0 W. At  what  rate  should  the  generator  rotate  to
provide 12.0 V to the bulb? Consider the resistance of the
wire on the armature.

21–6 Back EMF and Torque

24. (I) A motor has an armature resistance of

If it draws
8.20 A when running at full speed and connected to a 120-V
line, how large is the back emf?

3.65 (cid:3).

25. (I)  The  back  emf  in  a motor  is  72 V  when  operating  at
1800 rpm. What would be the back emf at 2300 rpm if the
magnetic field is unchanged?

26. (II) What will be the current in the motor of Example 21–8

if the load causes it to run at half speed?

21–7 Transformers
[Assume 100% efficiency, unless stated otherwise.]
27. (I)  A  transformer  is  designed  to  change  117 V  into
13,500 V, and there are 148 turns in the primary coil. How
many turns are in the secondary coil?

28. (I) A transformer has 360 turns in the primary coil and 120
in the secondary coil. What kind of transformer is this, and
by what factor does it change the voltage? By what factor
does it change the current?

29. (I) A step-up transformer increases 25 V to 120 V. What is
the current in the secondary coil as compared to the primary
coil?

30. (I) Neon signs require 12 kV for their operation. To operate
from a 240-V line, what must be the ratio of secondary to
primary turns of the transformer? What would the voltage
output be if the transformer were connected in reverse?

31. (II) A model-train transformer plugs into 120-V ac and draws
0.35 A while supplying 6.8 A to the train. (a) What voltage
is present across the tracks? (b) Is the transformer step-up
or step-down?

32. (II) The output voltage of a 95-W transformer is 12 V, and
the input current is 25 A. (a) Is this a step-up or a step-down
transformer? (b) By what factor is the voltage multiplied?
33. (II) A transformer has 330 primary turns and 1240 secondary
turns. The input voltage is 120 V and the output current is
15.0 A. What are the output voltage and input current?
34. (II) If 35 MW of power at 45 kV (rms) arrives at a town from
a generator via
transmission lines, calculate (a) the
emf at the generator end of the lines, and (b) the fraction
of the power generated that is wasted in the lines.

4.6-(cid:3)

35. (II) For the transmission of electric power from power plant
to home, as depicted in Fig. 21–25, where the electric power
sent by the plant is 100 kW, about how far away could the
house be from the power plant before power loss is 50%?
Assume  the  wires  have  a resistance  per  unit  length  of
5 * 10–5 (cid:3)(cid:2)m.

36. (II)  For  the  electric  power  transmission  system  shown  in
Fig. 21–25, what is the ratio
NS(cid:2)NP
for (a) the step-up trans-
former, (b) the step-down transformer next to the home?
37. (III) Suppose 2.0 MW is to arrive at a large shopping mall
over two
lines. Estimate how much power is saved
if the voltage is stepped up from 120 V to 1200 V and then
down  again, rather  than  simply  transmitting  at  120 V.
Assume the transformers are each 99% efficient.

0.100-(cid:3)

38. (III) Design a dc transmission line that can transmit 925 MW
of electricity 185 km with only a 2.5% loss. The wires are to
be made of aluminum and the voltage is 660 kV.

*21–10 Inductance

*39. (I)  If  the  current  in  a 160-mH  coil  changes  steadily  from
25.0 A  to  10.0 A  in  350 ms, what  is  the  magnitude  of  the
induced emf?

*40. (I) What is the inductance of a coil if the coil produces an emf
to

of 2.50 V when the current in it changes from
±31.0 mA

–28.0 mA

in 14.0 ms?

*41. (I) Determine the inductance L of a 0.60-m-long air-filled
solenoid 2.9 cm in diameter containing 8500 loops.
*42. (I) How many turns of wire would be required to make a
130-mH inductor out of a 30.0-cm-long air-filled solenoid
with a diameter of 5.8 cm?

*43. (II) An air-filled cylindrical inductor has 2600 turns, and it is
2.5 cm in diameter and 28.2 cm long. (a) What is its induc-
tance? (b) How many turns would you need to generate the
same inductance if the core were iron-filled instead? Assume
the magnetic permeability of iron is about 1200 times that of
free space.
*44. (II) A coil has

resistance and 112-mH inductance.
If  the  current  is  3.00 A  and  is  increasing  at  a rate  of
3.80 A(cid:2)s,
what is the potential difference across the coil at
this moment?

2.25-(cid:3)

Problems

621

*45. (III) A physics professor wants to demonstrate the large size
of the henry unit. On the outside of a 12-cm-diameter plastic
hollow tube, she wants to wind an air-filled solenoid with
self-inductance of 1.0 H using copper wire with a 0.81-mm
diameter. The solenoid is to be tightly wound with each turn
touching its neighbor (the wire has a thin insulating layer
on its surface so the neighboring turns are not in electrical
contact). How long will the plastic tube need to be and how
many kilometers of copper wire will be required? What will
be the resistance of this solenoid?

l
*46. (III) A  long  thin  solenoid  of  length  and  cross-sectional
closely packed turns of wire. Wrapped
N
turns, Fig. 21–63.
2

N
area A contains
1
tightly around it is an insulated coil of
Assume all the flux from
coil  1  (the  solenoid)
passes through coil 2,
and  calculate  the
mutual inductance.

N1

I1

A

N2

l

FIGURE 21–63
Problem 46.

*21–11 Magnetic Energy Storage

*47. (I) The  magnetic  field  inside  an  air-filled  solenoid  36 cm
long and 2.0 cm in diameter is 0.72 T. Approximately how
much energy is stored in this field?

*48. (II) At

t = 0,

the  current  through  a 45.0-mH  inductor  is
50.0 mA and is increasing at the rate of
What is
the initial energy stored in the inductor, and how long does
it take for the energy to increase by a factor of 5.0 from the
initial value?

115 mA(cid:2)s.

*49. (II) Assuming  the  Earth’s  magnetic  field  averages  about
0.50 * 10–4 T
near Earth’s surface, estimate the total energy
stored in this field in the first 10 km above Earth’s surface.

*21–12 LR Circuit

*50. (II)  It  takes  2.56 ms  for  the  current  in  an  LR circuit  to
increase from zero to 0.75 its maximum value. Determine
(a) the time constant of the circuit, (b) the resistance of the
circuit if

L = 31.0 mH.

*51. (II)  How  many  time  constants  does  it  take  for  the
potential difference across the resistor in an LR circuit like
that in Fig. 21–37 to drop to 2.5% of its original value, after
the switch is moved to the upper position, removing
from
the circuit?
*52. (III) Determine

t = 0
(when the battery is con-
nected)  for  the  LR circuit  of  Fig. 21–37  and  show  that  if
I continued  to  increase  at  this  rate, it  would  reach  its
maximum value in one time constant.

¢I(cid:2)¢t

V
0

at

*53. (III) After  how  many  time  constants  does  the  current  in
Fig. 21–37 reach within (a) 10%, (b) 1.0%, and (c) 0.1% of
its maximum value?

*21–13 AC Circuits and Reactance

*54. (I)  What  is  the  reactance  of  a

6.20-mF

capacitor  at  a

frequency of (a) 60.0 Hz, (b) 1.00 MHz?

*55. (I) At what frequency will a 32.0-mH inductor have a reac-

tance of

660 (cid:3)?
*56. (I)  At  what  frequency  will  a

reactance of

6.10 k(cid:3)?

2.40-mF

capacitor  have  a

*57. (II) Calculate the reactance of, and rms current in, a 260-mH
radio coil connected to a 240-V (rms) 10.0-kHz ac line. Ignore
resistance.

*58. (II) An inductance coil operates at 240 V and 60.0 Hz. It

draws 12.2 A. What is the coil’s inductance?
*59. (II) (a) What is the reactance of a well-insulated

0.030-mF
capacitor connected to a 2.0-kV (rms) 720-Hz line? (b) What
will be the peak value of the current?

*21–14 LRC Circuits

36-k(cid:3)

*61. (II) A

*60. (II) For a 120-V rms 60-Hz voltage, an rms current of 70 mA
passing through the human body for 1.0 s could be lethal.
What must be the impedance of the body for this to occur?
resistor is in series with a 55-mH inductor and
an ac source. Calculate the impedance of the circuit if the
source frequency is (a) 50 Hz, and (b)
resistor and a

3.0 * 104 Hz.
capacitor are connected
in series to an ac source. Calculate the impedance of the
circuit if the source frequency is (a) 60 Hz, and (b) 60,000 Hz.

*62. (II) A

3.5-k(cid:3)

3.0-mF

*63. (II) Determine the resistance of a coil if its impedance is

235 (cid:3)

and its reactance is

115 (cid:3).

*64. (II) Determine the total impedance, phase angle, and rms
current  in  an  LRC circuit  connected  to  a 10.0-kHz,
and
725-V  (rms)  source  if
C = 6250 pF.

L = 28.0 mH,  R = 8.70 k(cid:3),

capacitor  and  a

*65. (II)  An  ac  voltage  source  is  connected  in  series  with  a
1.0-mF
650-(cid:3)
resistor. Using  a digital  ac
voltmeter, the amplitude of the voltage source is measured
to be 4.0 V rms, while the voltages across the resistor and
across the capacitor are found to be 3.0 V rms and 2.7 V rms,
respectively. Determine  the  frequency  of  the  ac  voltage
source. Why is the voltage measured across the voltage source
not equal to the sum of the voltages measured across the
resistor and across the capacitor?

*66. (III) (a) What is the rms current in an LR circuit when a
R = 2.80 k(cid:3)
60.0-Hz 120-V rms ac voltage is applied, where
(b) What  is  the  phase  angle  between
and
voltage and current? (c) How much power is dissipated?
(d) What are the rms voltage readings across R and L?

L = 350 mH?

*67. (III)  (a)  What  is  the  rms  current  in  an  RC circuit  if
R = 6.60 k(cid:3), C = 1.80 mF,
and the rms applied voltage is
120 V  at  60.0 Hz? (b)  What  is  the  phase  angle  between
voltage and current? (c) What are the voltmeter readings
across R and C?

R = 520 (cid:3).

*68. (III)  Suppose  circuit  B  in  Fig. 21–42a  consists  of  a resis-
The  filter  capacitor  has  capacitance
tance
C = 1.2 mF.
Will  this  capacitor  act  to  eliminate  60-Hz  ac
but pass a high-frequency signal of frequency 6.0 kHz? To
check  this, determine  the  voltage  drop  across  R for  a
130-mV signal of frequency (a) 60 Hz; (b) 6.0 kHz.

*21–15 Resonance in AC Circuits

*69. (I) A 3500-pF capacitor is connected in series to a

55.0-mH
What is the resonant frequency of

4.00 (cid:3).

coil of resistance
this circuit?

*70. (II) The variable capacitor in the tuner of an AM radio has a
capacitance of 2800 pF when the radio is tuned to a station
at 580 kHz. (a) What must be the capacitance for a station at
1600 kHz? (b) What is the inductance (assumed constant)?
R = 4.10 (cid:3).
(a) What  value  must  C have  to  produce  resonance  at
3600 Hz? (b)  What  will  be  the  maximum  current  at
resonance if the peak external voltage is 150 V?

*71. (II)  An  LRC circuit  has

L = 14.8 mH

and

622 CHAPTER 21 Electromagnetic Induction and Faraday’s Law

*72. (III) A resonant circuit using a 260-nF capacitor is to reso-
nate at 18.0 kHz. The air-core inductor is to be a solenoid
with  closely  packed  coils  made  from  12.0 m  of  insulated
wire 1.1 mm in diameter. How many loops will the inductor
contain?

*73. (III)  A  2200-pF  capacitor  is  charged  to  120 V  and  then
quickly connected to an inductor. The frequency of oscilla-
tion is observed to be 19 kHz. Determine (a) the inductance,
(b)  the  peak  value  of  the  current, and  (c)  the  maximum
energy stored in the magnetic field of the inductor.

General Problems

74. Suppose  you  are  looking  at  two  wire  loops  in  the  plane
of the page as shown in Fig. 21–64. When switch S is closed
in the left-hand coil, (a) what is the direction of the induced
current in the other loop? (b) What is the situation after
a “long” time? (c)  What  is  the  direction  of  the  induced
current in the right-hand loop if that loop is quickly pulled
horizontally to the right? (d) Suppose the right-hand loop
also has a switch like the left-hand loop. The switch in the
left-hand loop has been closed a long time when the switch
in the right-hand loop is closed. What happens in this case?
Explain each answer.

81. A  pair  of  power  transmission  lines  each  have  a

0.95-(cid:3)
resistance  and  carry  740 A  over  9.0 km. If  the  rms  input
voltage is 42 kV, calculate (a) the voltage at the other end,
(b) the power input, (c) power loss in the lines, and (d) the
power output.

82. Two  resistanceless  rails  rest  32 cm  apart  on  a 6.0° ramp.
They are joined at the bottom by a
resistor. At the
top a copper bar of mass 0.040 kg (ignore its resistance) is
laid across the rails. Assuming a vertical 0.45-T magnetic
field, what is the terminal (steady) velocity of the bar as it
slides frictionlessly down the rails?

0.60-(cid:3)

FIGURE 21–64
Problem 74.

S

−+

B
B
,

75. A square loop 24.0 cm on a side has a resistance of

6.10 (cid:3).
It is initially in a 0.665-T magnetic field, with its plane per-
pendicular to
but is removed from the field in 40.0 ms.
Calculate the electric energy dissipated in this process.
76. A  high-intensity  desk  lamp  is  rated  at  45 W  but  requires
only  12 V. It  contains  a transformer  that  converts  120-V
household voltage. (a) Is the transformer step-up or step-
down? (b) What is the current in the secondary coil when
the lamp is on? (c) What is the current in the primary coil?
(d) What is the resistance of the bulb when on?

77. A flashlight can be made that is powered by the induced
current from a magnet moving through a coil of wire. The
coil and magnet are inside a plastic tube that can be shaken
causing  the  magnet  to  move  back  and  forth  through  the
coil. Assume the magnet has a maximum field strength of
0.05 T. Make reasonable assumptions and specify the size
of  the  coil  and  the  number  of  turns  necessary  to  light  a
standard 1-watt, 3-V flashlight bulb.

78. Conceptual Example 21–9 states that an overloaded motor
may  burn  out  due  to  high  currents. Suppose  you  have  a
blender with an internal resistance of
(a) At 120 V,
what  is  the  initial  current  through  the  blender? (b)  The
blender is rated at 2.0 A for continuous use. What is the back
emf of the blender? (c) At what rate is heat dissipated in the
blender during normal use? (d) If the blender jams and stops
turning, at what rate is heat dissipated in the motor coils?

3.0 (cid:3).

79. Power is generated at 24 kV at a generating plant located
56 km  from  a town  that  requires  55 MW  of  power  at
12 kV. Two transmission lines from the plant to the town
each  have  a resistance  of
What  should  the
output voltage of the transformer at the generating plant be
for  an  overall  transmission  efficiency  of  98.5%, assuming
a perfect transformer?

0.10 (cid:3)(cid:2)km.

80. The primary windings of a transformer which has an 88%
efficiency  are  connected  to  110-V  ac. The  secondary
windings  are  connected  across  a
75-W  lightbulb.
(a) Calculate the current through the primary windings of
the  transformer. (b)  Calculate  the  ratio  of  the  number
of primary windings of the transformer to the number of
secondary windings of the transformer.

2.4-(cid:3),

83. Show that the power loss in transmission lines,

PL = APTB2 RL(cid:2)V2,

by
the user, V is the delivered voltage, and
of the power lines.

where

PT

PL ,

is given
is the power transmitted to
is the resistance

RL

230 turns(cid:2)cm

surrounds a solenoid with

84. A coil with 190 turns, a radius of 5.0 cm, and a resistance of
12 (cid:3)
and a radius
of 4.5 cm (Fig. 21–65). The current in the solenoid changes
at  a constant  rate  from  0  to
2.0 A in 0.10 s. Calculate the
magnitude  and  direction
of the induced current
in the outer coil.

FIGURE 21–65
Problem 84.

I

85. A certain electronic device needs to be protected against
sudden surges in current. In particular, after the power is
turned on, the current should rise no more than 7.5 mA in
the  first
and  is
designed to operate at 55 mA. How would you protect this
device?

The  device  has  resistance

120 ms.

120 (cid:3)

86. A 35-turn 12.5-cm-diameter coil is placed between the pole
pieces  of  an  electromagnet. When  the  electromagnet  is
turned on, the flux through the coil changes, inducing an
T(cid:2)s
emf. At what rate (in
) must the magnetic field change
if the emf is to be 120 V?

87. Calculate the peak output voltage of a simple generator
whose  square  armature  windings  are  6.60 cm  on  a side;
the  armature  contains  125  loops  and  rotates  in  a field  of
0.200 T at a rate of

120 rev(cid:2)s.

*88. Typical  large  values  for  electric  and  magnetic  fields
attained  in  laboratories  are  about
and
2.0 T. (a) Determine the energy density for each field and
compare. (b)  What  magnitude  electric  field  would  be
needed to produce the same energy density as the 2.0-T
magnetic field?

1.0 * 104 V(cid:2)m

*89. Determine the inductance L of the primary of a transformer
whose input is 220 V at 60.0 Hz if the current drawn is 6.3 A.
Assume no current in the secondary.

General Problems

623

*90. A 130-mH coil whose resistance is

is connected to a
capacitor C and  a 1360-Hz  source  voltage. If  the  current
and voltage are to be in phase, what value must C have?

15.8 (cid:3)

*91. The  wire  of  a tightly  wound  solenoid  is  unwound  and
used to make another tightly wound solenoid of twice the
diameter. By what factor does the inductance change?

Search and Learn
1. (a)  Sections  19–7  and  21–9  discuss  conditions  when  and
where it is especially important to have ground fault circuit
interrupters (GFCIs) installed. What is it about those places
that makes “touching ground” especially risky? (b) Describe
how a GFCI works and compare to fuses and circuit breakers
(see also Section 18–6).

2. While demonstrating Faraday’s law to her class, a physics
professor inadvertently moves the gold ring on her finger
from a location where a 0.68-T magnetic field points along
her  finger  to  a zero-field  location  in  45 ms. The  1.5-cm-
diameter ring has a resistance and mass of
and 15 g,
respectively. (a) Estimate the thermal energy produced in
the ring due to the flow of induced current. (b) Find the
temperature  rise  of  the  ring, assuming  all  of  the  thermal
energy  produced  goes  into  increasing  the  ring’s  temper-
ature. The specific heat of gold is

129 J(cid:2)kg(cid:2)C°.

55 m(cid:3)

35 km(cid:2)h.

3. A small electric car overcomes a 250-N friction force when
traveling
The  electric  motor  is  powered  by  ten
12-V batteries connected in series and is coupled directly
to the wheels whose diameters are 58 cm. The 290 armature
coils are rectangular, 12 cm by 15 cm, and rotate in a 0.65-T
magnetic field. (a) How much current does the motor draw
to produce the required torque? (b) What is the back emf?
(c) How much power is dissipated in the coils? (d) What
percent of the input power is used to drive the car? [Hint:
Check Sections 6–10, 18–5, 20–9, 20–10, and 21–6.]

4. Explain the advantage of using ac rather than dc current
when electric power needs to be transported long distances.
(See Section 21–7.)

*92. The Q factor of a resonant ac circuit (Section 21–15) can
be defined as the ratio of the voltage across the capacitor
(or inductor) to the voltage across the resistor, at resonance.
The larger the Q factor, the sharper the resonance curve will
be and the sharper the tuning. (a) Show that the Q factor
is given by the equation
(b) At a reso-
nant  frequency
what  must  be  the  values
of L and R to  produce  a Q factor  of  650? Assume  that
C = 0.010 mF.

Q = (1(cid:2)R)2L(cid:2)C .

= 1.0 MHz,

f
0

I
0

= 155 A

f = 60 Hz

5. A power line carrying a sinusoidally varying current with
frequency
runs at
and peak value
a height  of  7.0 m  across  a farmer’s  land  (Fig. 21–66).
The  farmer  constructs  a vertical  2.0-m-high  2000-turn
rectangular  wire  coil  below  the  power  line. The  farmer
hopes  to  use  the  induced  voltage  in  this  coil  to  power
120-V electrical equipment, which requires a sinusoidally
f = 60 Hz
varying voltage with frequency
and peak value
l
V
Estimate the length  of the coil needed. Would
0
¢B
this be stealing? [Hint: Consider
over one-quarter of
a cycle

See Sections 20–5 and 18–7.]

= 170 V.

 sB.

A 1
240

(cid:4) 155 A
I0
f (cid:4) 60 Hz

l

Coil

7.0 m

2.0 m

FIGURE 21–66 Search and Learn 5.

6. A ballistic galvanometer is a device that measures the total
charge Q that passes through it in a short time. It is con-
nected to a search coil that measures B (also called a flip coil)
which is a small coil with N turns, each of cross-sectional
area A. The flip coil is placed in the magnetic field to be
measured with its face perpendicular to the field. It is then
quickly rotated 180° about a diameter. Show that the total
charge Q that  flows  in  the  induced  current  during  this
short “flip” time  is  proportional  to  the  magnetic  field  B.
In particular, show that

B =

QR
2NA

where R is the total resistance of the circuit including the
coil and ballistic galvanometer which measures charge Q.

A N S W E R S   T O   E X E R C I S E S

A: (e).
B: (a) Counterclockwise; (b) clockwise; (c) zero;

(d) counterclockwise.

C: Clockwise (conventional current counterclockwise).
D: (a) Increase (brighter); (b) yes; resists more (counter

torque).

E: 10 turns.
F: From Eq. 21–11b, the higher the frequency the lower the
reactance, so in (a) more high frequency current flows to
circuit B. In (b) higher frequencies pass to ground whereas
lower frequencies pass more easily to circuit B.

624 CHAPTER 21 Electromagnetic Induction and Faraday’s Law
